Date: 11 December 1982 20:43-EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN at MIT-MC>
Subject:  The Archive & Administrivia
To: CUBE-LOVERS at MIT-MC

Those of you who look through the archives of old Cube-Lovers mail
will notice that I have split off a new section of the archive.  The
mail now lives in:

MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL0	;oldest mail in foward order
MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL1	;next oldest mail in foward order
MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL2	;more of same
MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL3	;yet more of same
MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL4	;still more of same
MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL	;recent mail in reverse order

Those of you who are wondering if Cube-Lovers might be temporarily off the
air when TCP is installed on January 1 can rest assured that there is an
ITS TPC implementation in progress, and come January 1 the ITS machines
will probably be no worse off than the rest of the net.  My biggest worry
is not that ITS won't be able to send mail (since I can always move the
list to another machine if that proves necessary), but that so many of you
all will be having difficulty recieving mail that I will be up to my neck
in error messages from various mailers around the net.

That is one of my reasons for splitting off a section of the archive at
this time.  I'm willing to bet that a fair number of you will be requesting
the back mail that you have missed during the storm at the beginning of the
year, and this way I have a small file that I can easily send off to you.

Finally let me remind you all to please address your requests to
Cube-Lovers-Request at MIT-MC.  If that address, or Cube-Lovers at MIT-MC
ever seems to be giving you trouble, you might also try Cube-Lovers at
MIT-Multics and Cube-Lovers-Request at MIT-Multics.

				-Alan

Date: 21 December 1982 23:50-EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject: Correction to previous message.
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

It being so difficult to set up a Multics mailing list I'm retracting the 
promise that those Multics addresses will ever work and will instead
just give out my personal Multics address as an emergency contact.

Date: Wednesday, 22 December 1982, 15:33-EST
From: Allan C. Wechsler <acw at SCRC-VIXEN>
Subject: Hinton's cubes.
To: Cube-Lovers at MC

In September I received a query from Phil Servito, who
has since joined this mailing list, about a game or puzzle
called "Hinton's cubes".  Does anybody have any information
about this toy besides the following?

Charles Howard Hinton was an American mathematician who
believed that anybody could learn to do four-dimensional
visualization if properly trained.  He invented a set of
colored blocks which were supposed do this training.

Philip -- you said Martin Gardner knows more.  Is this because
the cubes were once discussed in a Sci. Am. Mathematical
Games column?  If so, the Sci. Am. cumulative index may help.

   --- Allan

Date: 29 Dec 1982 0954-PST
Subject: article of interest.
From: Dave Dyer       <DDYER@USC-ISIB>
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC


 The Christmas issue of NEW SCIENTIST has an article by Singmaster
about the basics and metaphysics of the cube.  No great revelations,
but a literate discussion of cubeology.  
-------

Date: 29 Dec 1982 19:01:04-EST
From: meister at mit-ccc
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc
Subject: 4x4x4 poll


  i am interested i getting information on the various solving methods
used on the 4x4x4, and the times that it is being done in. (average) 
my own method is to solve it as follows:

       1) top layer (no general order to this)
       2) the rest of the centers by layers 
       3) the edges on the center slices
       4) bottom corners
       5) bottom edges

 average time: 1 min 55 sec - 2 min 5 sec depending on my blood-alcohol level. 

   please send me your general method and solving times.
   i'll compile the results and put them on the list.

                                              thanks for replying,
                                                          -phil
 p.s. -  send replies to  meister@ccc@mc 



Date: 30 December 1982 00:41-EST
From: Jonathan David Callas <JURGEN @ MIT-MC>
Subject: Hinton's cubes.
To: ALAN @ MIT-MC
cc: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC


I remember reading about Hinton's cubes in an old Mathematical Games anthology,
so a cumulative index would be the thing. Gardner wrote about them and 
apparantly they worked, but there were stern warnings not to play with them,
because (!) they cause insanity in some people(!!). Gardner said something
to the tune of that the human brain is not meant to do 4-dimensional geometry,
and these things will make your brain bugcheck. Ever since then, I have been
fascenated by the thought of a puzzle that would blow your mind  literally! Of
course, this was in the days before  it was fashionable to use chemical means
to do this. Anyone else know anything about them?

	Jon

Date:  3 Jan 1983 0915-PST
From: ISAACS at SRI-KL
Subject: Hinton's Cubes
To: cube-lovers at MIT-MC
cc: isaacs at SRI-KL

   Hinton's Cubes are mentioned in Martin Gardners "Mathematical Carnival",
Chapter 4, Hypercubes, a reprint of the November, 1966, Mathematical Games
column from Scientific American.  He doesn't say much, mainly that "Hinton...
devised a system of using colored blocks for making three-space models of 
sections of a tesseract."  Hinton believed that they would help develop
an intuitive grasp of 4-space.  The fullest account of them mentioned is
the book k"A New Era of Thought", by C. Howard Hinton, Swan Sonnenschein, 
1888, apparantly reprinted in 1910.  
  Gardner also prints a letter he received from Hiram Barton, of England,
including "A shudder ran down my spine when I read your reference to Hinton's
cubes.  I nearly got hooked on them myself in the nineeen-twenties.  Please 
believe me when I say that they are completely mind-destroying.  The only
person I ever met who had worked with them seriously was Francis Sedlak, a 
Czech neo-Hegelian philosopher...who lived in an Oneida-like community near
Stroud, in Gloucestershire.
   "As you must know, the technique consists essentially in the sequential
visualizing of the adjoint internal faces of the poly-colored unit cubes 
making up the large cube.  It is not difficult to acquire considerable 
facility in this, but the process is one of autohypnosis and, after a while, 
the sequences begin to parade themselves through one's mind of their own 
accord."
   It goes on, but doesn't say a great deal more.  I don't have my copy of
Hintons book "The Fourth Dimension", but maybe it will give some more 
description.
  If anybody does find some marketed versions of the cubes, put it on the list.
   --- Stan
-------

Date: 4 January 1983 03:54-EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject: Humor
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

From "Special Deliverance" a recent novel by Clifford Simak:

   "He also mentioned a cube," said Sandra.  "I wonder what it could be.
   Never before have I heard anything described simply as a cube."

Well I certainly have!

(And no, the book actually has nothing to do with Hungarian Cubes.  It just
struck me as strange that someone could write that line at a time when an
object that frequently WAS described simply as "the cube" was enjoying some
popularity.  Perhaps Sandra's ignorance is excusable in light of the fact
that she comes from an alternate universe...)

Date:  5 Jan 1983 1802-PST
From: ISAACS at SRI-KL
Subject: Other news
To: CUBE-LOVERS at MIT-MC

   The new RUBIK'S magazine is out.  Not as interesting (to me) as the first.
Several articles on the Snake, on cube contests, and some on other games.
A computer flow-chart for the game Awari, and an analysis of Chinese Rings
are included.  The most interesting cube articles are one on how disordered
a cube can get; and one on pretty patterns in other cube universes (ie, when
an edge is flipped, what symmetric patterns are there). 
  If you haven't seen it, the book "INside Rubik's Cube and Beyond" by
Christoph Bandelow is very good.  It's translated from German, and contains
a fairly technical discussion of the Mathematical Model, solving in the
supergroup, other magic polyhedra, a detailed flowchart of a cube-solving
program (which also checks the input for legality), and a comprehensive 
Maneuver Index, which contains, among other things, a complete catalog of
3-cycles.  It includes an index, a bibliography, and a good section of
colored pictures in the center (including one of a 5x5x5!!!). Recomended.
   I've also heard a rumor that the solution to "Masquerade" has been
written (and maybe published).  Has anyone heard anything of this?
  -- Stan
-------

Date:  5 Jan 1983 1806-PST
From: ISAACS at SRI-KL
Subject: more on Hinton's Cubes
To: cube-lovers at MIT-MC

  I got my "Speculations on the Fourth Dimension, Selected Writings of
Charles H. Hinton", Dover, 1980, back.  It doesn't reprint Hinton's
description of his cubes, but Rudolf v.B.Rucker, in the introduction 
describes something more of them:
  "The second part of "A New Era of Thought" consists of a description 
of how to visualize a tesseract by looking at various 3-D cross sections
of it.  On is to construct a set of 12 cubes, coloring the faces, edges
and corners all manner of different colors. (Eighty-one different colors
are used, and some rather unfamiliar ones are resorted to. ...)Eight of
these cubes make up the boundaries of the hypercube, and the four others
are cross sections taken between pairs of opposite cubes.  The way in
which all the cubes fit together is really explained rather well, if one 
has the will to endure not only 81 colors, but the 81 Latin names which
Hinton assigns to the parts of the tesseract.
   "In addition to the set of 12 large cubes, there was also to be a set of 81 
small monochrome cubes, each representing a part of the tesseract.  By
moving theese little cubes about one could better comprehend the fact that
rotation through the fourth dimension corresponds to mirror image reflection
in 3-D space."
   In Hinton's book "The Fourth Dimension", published n 1904, he has a
streamlined version of the tesseract section models.  "There were actually 
three parts to the complete set of tesseract models.  There was a set of 27
"slabs," actually cardboard squares; a set of 81 one-inch monochrome cubes,
each a different color; and a set of 12 multicolored "catalogue cubes,"
which were depicted in a color plate bound into "The Fourth Dimension".  When
the book came out, one could buy a set consisting of the 27 slabs and the
81 little cubes for 16 shillings, or a set consisting of the 12 catalogue
cubes for 21 shillings."
  If anyone on this list can find a copy of "The Fourth Dimension", I, for
one, would like to buy it.  I wonder if any of the models are around anywhere?
     --- Stan
-------

Date:  7-Jan-83 10:19:31 PST (Friday)
From: Pettit at PARC-MAXC
Subject: 4-D Graphics Program
In-reply-to: ALAN's message of 5 January 1983 23:40-EST
To: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
cc: Cube-Lovers at MIT-MC

Scott Kim, the author of Inversions, wrote a program about 4 or 5 years ago which ran on Tenex, and allowed one to rotate 4-D skeletal objects and view the 2-D projections (on an Imlac display).  I don't know what language it was written in.  It was apparently quite good at allowing one to achieve an intuition for 4-D space.  I'll send him a message and ask if his program is available anywhere for playing with.

--Teri Pettit at Xerox OSD   

Date: Monday, 24 January 1983  13:57-EST
From: Leonard N. Foner <TK.FONER @ MIT-OZ>
To:   Cube-Lovers @ MIT-MC
Subject: Shortest sequence of moves?
cc:   Tk.Foner @ MIT-OZ
Reply-to: Foner at MIT-MC

I remember hearing about a program, probably running on the color LISP
machine, that could take an arbitrary cube and try to see what the
shortest move sequence to its slution is.  Does anyone remember where
this program is and how to use it?

Specifically, I have been given the following cube and asked to find
the shortest solution:

    GBG
    BGW
    GGG
RRR WYW ORO YYY
ORO GWY OOO WYB
RRR WWW ORO YWY
    BBB
    GBY
    BGB

If anyone can either find the program I think I remember, or can
determine what they think is the shortest solution, I'd be \very/
grateful!  Speed is of the essence.

Thanx much, everyone!

						<LNF>

Date: 24 Jan 1983 1122-PST
From: ISAACS at SRI-KL
Subject: Masquerade
To: cube-lovers at MIT-MC

   A small paperback version of Masquerade has come out in England, which
contains a history, who solved it, and what the solution is.  I don't know
if it is available in the U.S. yet, but I have seen a copy, and got the
following info:  The full title & subtitle is "The Treasure Hunt of the 
Century / Masquerade  / Kit Williams Tells the Answer to the Riddle",
ISBN 0 224 02937 1; Jonathan Cape (pub), Thirty Bedford Square, London.
I will check around to see if it is available   ---  Just did; At lease
one local book store (Printers Inc, in Palo Alto, Ca.) says it's on order,
and they expect in in a day or two.
  If anyone wants a rough idea of how to find the solution, I can put it
on the net.
 -- Stan
-------

Date: 24 January 1983 16:51 EST
From: David C. Plummer <DCP @ MIT-MC>
Subject: Shortest sequence of moves?
To: FONER @ MIT-MC
cc: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

    Date: Monday, 24 January 1983  13:57-EST
    From: Leonard N. Foner <TK.FONER @ MIT-OZ>
    Reply-to: Foner at MIT-MC

    I remember hearing about a program, probably running on the color LISP
    machine, that could take an arbitrary cube and try to see what the
    shortest move sequence to its slution is.  Does anyone remember where
    this program is and how to use it?

Sorry, no such program.  Don't we wish though!!  If we understood
the mathematics of the cube well enough to write such a program,
we probably wouldn't have this mailing list anymore.

Date: 28 Jan 1983 3:33-EST
From: Dan Hoey <HOEY @ CMU-CS-A>
Subject: The shortest sequence of moves.
To: Foner at MIT-MC
Cc: Cube-Lovers at MIT-MC
In-Reply-To: Leonard N. Foner's message of Monday, 24 January 1983  1357-EST

Leonard,

The process (R U^2 B^2 L')^2 will restore your cube in twelve
quarter-twists when executed with the Green face Up and the White face
Front, and twelve is the minimum sufficient number of quarter-twists.

Dave Plummer's discouraging word is usually right--we know of no
algorithm to let us find optimal processes for most positions.  This is
because the only known algorithms involve exhaustive breadth-first
search, and there are far too many positions of the cube to make this
practical in either time or space.  But when the optimal process is
sufficiently short, some headway can be made.  Having some megabytes
and CPU-hours at my disposal, I was able to list
    (A) all positions reachable in five qtw from your cube, and
    (B) all positions reachable in five qtw from SOLVED.
Finding that sets (A) and (B) are disjoint, I conclude that there is no
ten qtw process for the pattern, so the twelve qtw process is optimal.

I discovered the optimal process by hand.  Of course, I could have just
run the program one more qtw and it would give me the process, along
with any other twelve-qtw processes that may exist.  The problem with
that approach is that I don't have that many megabytes and CPU-hours.

My program, by the way, is written in C and runs under Unix.  It trades
time and storage efficiency for programmer laziness, making extensive
use of the Unix sort utility.  Dave Plummer has written a much
optimized program, in assembler language for the PDP-20, that uses very
clever hacks (some of them my own).  As I recall, he and I estimated
that with about 150 megabytes and a day or two elapsed time on an
unloaded machine it could take the search three more quarter-twists.
Does anyone need to settle a bar bet on an eighteen qtw process?

				Dan

Date: 28 Jan 1983 1838-PST
From: ISAACS at SRI-KL
Subject: Circle Puzzles
To: cube-lovers at MIT-MC
cc: isaacs at SRI-KL

   I just got some very nice examples of circle (group-theory) puzzles -
similar to the Lorente Grill puzzles shown in Hofstadters' Sci.Am.
article in July, 1982 (p. 26).  They are made by Douglas Engel, under
the name of General Symmetrics, Inc, 2935 W. Chenango, Englewood, Co,
80110.  He is selling some as experimental items, and one version he
hopes to have marketed "soon".  They all consist of two intersection
circles, each of which rotate; I have 3 kinds: the "21 piece", similar
to 2/3 of Lorente's Trebol puzzle; the "35 piece", similar to the
one in the upper right corner of the article "Another Grill puzzle by
Lorente", and a "19 piece", similar to the 21 piece, except the circles
intersect in the center.  Each of these are quite different from each other;
the 35 piece has 3 different pieces which rotate in 4 different cycles
(compare to the Cubes' 3 kinds of pieces - edge, corner, and center).
In the 35 piece, a straightforward "in in out out" (R'LRL') type move
will move the centers in a 3-cycle, the "square" pieces in a pair of
2-cycles, and the "triangles" in 2 separate 5-cycles.
   (Doug is selling these at $10.00 for the 19 or 21 piece, $20 for the
35 piece.)
   Doug Engel has also written a paper called "Some Problems Suggested
By Circle Puzzles", mostly asking questions about various kinds of
symmetry in this type, whether there are an infinite number of them,
etc.  I wonder what the best way to talk about them and analyze them
from a group theory perspective is.  I'll try to put in more information
and theories as I work on them; I'd like to hear any thoughts or
suggestions.  Right now, I want to go home for dinner.
  -- Stan
-------

Date: Saturday, 29 January 1983  23:33-EST
From: Leonard N. Foner <TK.FONER @ MIT-OZ>
To:   Dan Hoey <HOEY @ CMU-CS-A>
Cc:   Cube-Lovers @ MIT-MC, Tk.Foner @ MIT-OZ
Reply-to: Foner at MIT-MC
Subject: The shortest sequence of moves.
In-reply-to: The message of 28 Jan 1983  03:33-EST from Dan Hoey <HOEY at CMU-CS-A>

Thanx for the solution...  we determined independently that 12 qtw
seemed to be minimal, but couldn't be absolutely sure.

Since you say with a couple of days of CPU time you could deal with 18
qtw processes, doesn't this mean that \any/ cube process can be
checked for minimality?  I can't recall whether the maximum number of
moves from solved is 17 or 19...  if the former, 18 qtw may be
unnecessary.  If the latter, then almost every cube process can be
checked directly, save the absolute longest ones (which are then
provably 19 anyway, since that's all they can be).  Is my reasoning
faulty here?  In any case, exactly how much more work in involved for
each qtw in solving the cube?  In other words, how fast does it grow
(what's the power on the exponent, if describable this way)?

Thanx much folks.

						<LNF>

Date: 30 January 1983 00:40 EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  The shortest sequence of moves.
To: FONER @ MIT-MC
cc: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC, Tk.Foner @ MIT-OZ, HOEY @ CMU-CS-A
In-reply-to: The message of 29 Jan 1983  23:33-EST from Leonard N. Foner <TK.FONER at MIT-OZ>

The maximum number of moves (qtw) from solved is certainly not 17 or 19.
All we know about that number is that it is greater than or equal to 21.
It could be even larger.  There is a fair amount of sentiment that it is
probably around 28, but that's just intuition.

Date: 30 Jan 1983 3:15-EST
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@cmu-cs-a>
Subject: Finding optimal processes
To: Cube-Lovers at mit-mc

The best known bounds put the maximum number of qtw at between 21
and 104.  At most about 1 percent of the cube's positions are
within 18 qtw of solved.

At each qtw, the number of positions increases by a factor of
almost sqrt(12+5*sqrt(6))+sqrt(6)+2 ~ 9.374.  [I say ``almost''
because this rate of increase does not take into account the
identities of length 12 qtw or greater.  Eventually, long identies
reduce this factor to zero.  But between six and seven qtw, the
factor is about 9.356].  If we want to show a 2n qtw process
optimal, we need only scan the table of n-1 qtw processes, so the
increase is more like a factor of 3 per qtw.

Finally, I would like to call attention to the fact that showing an
18 qtw process to be optimal requires about 150 megabytes and two
days on a PDP-20 for each such proof.  Finding someone to lend you
a big machine and a big disk for two days is not something you can
take for granted.  And if you want to do it on your Apple, be
prepared to sit around swapping 2400 floppies in and out for the
next decade or so, as that two day figure is mostly disk latency
rather than CPU time.

Date: Monday, 31 January 1983  21:48-EST
From: Leonard N. Foner <TK.FONER @ MIT-OZ>
To:   Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-OZ>
Cc:   CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC, HOEY @ CMU-CS-A, Tk.Foner @ MIT-OZ
Reply-to: Foner at MIT-MC
Subject: The shortest sequence of moves.
In-reply-to: The message of 30 Jan 1983 00:40 EST from Alan Bawden <ALAN>

Ugh.  I see the problem is far more intractable than I had first
assumed.  I suppose it'll be quite some time indeed before we see any
sort of complete optimality solution if the maximum number of moves
from solved is anything larger than the low twenties.  I'll hunt
through the list archives for what's been accomplished on proving what
that number is...  if anyone feels like giving me a brief refresher
instead, I'd appreciate it, though the whole list might not like to
see it all again.

Thanx again everyone.

						<LNF>

Date: 1 February 1983 13:20 EST
From: David C. Plummer <DCP @ MIT-MC>
Subject: The shortest sequence of moves.
To: FONER @ MIT-MC
cc: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC, ALAN @ MIT-OZ, Tk.Foner @ MIT-OZ,
    HOEY @ CMU-CS-A

What you really want is some deep mathematical insight.  You
know, the kind Gauss and Fermat had...

Date: Tue 15 Feb 83 15:04:02-PST
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: "6-T" pretty pattern
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

  A friend of a friend says he can do the 6-T pattern in 16 moves
(he may call 1/2 turns a move, I'm not sure).  Does anybody know if
this is a minimum?  I'll try to get the sequence.
 -- Stan
-------

Date: Wednesday, 16 February 1983, 09:24-EST
From: Bernard S. Greenberg <BSG at SCRC-TENEX>
Subject: 5 x 5 x 5
To: cube-lovers at MIT-MC

I have seen and touched a 5 x 5 x 5 Rubik cube device.  It was 
allegedly a prototype by Meffert, the people who created the
Megaminx.  It was about the same size as a 4 x 4 x 4, with
slightly smaller cubies.  It had never been devirginized, nor
did its owner want it to be.  The face coverings are of the
same material as the coverings of the Megaminx.  No clue as to
how it operates, although looking at the black surface exposed
by partial twists, there seemed to be new techniques involved, of 
protuberances coming down from cubies sliding behind other
cubies, at least.  Although stated to be a prototype, it seemed
completely developed, and I would expect to see it available 
soon.

Date: 24 Feb 1983 0618-PST
From: JAY <JAY@USC-ECLB>
Subject: NxNxN: Finite N
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC

I have a program, not finished, which allows manipulation of a NxNxN
(N^3) cube.  Presently it WILL manipulate any NxNxN cube (i tried up
to 23) but it has a VERRY BAD user interface.  I plan to improve the
interface in the near future (this morning?)  I hope to be able to
parse the Cube-Talk mentoined in the first message in the archive
alan;cube mail1 (or 2?), or a super-set of it (like being able to save
cube's on disk, save move seq's (macros), defining macros with
parameters, and make logfiles of especialy hairy session).  As for
output... For small cubes (up to 8^3) i can use the normal air-plane
pattern of display, for medium cubes (8^3 <= size <= 12^3) i can put it
all on the normal terminal, but for larger cubes (24^3 >= cube >=
12^3) all i can do is display a face, or maybe two.

[Implementation]

 I am interested in a, WORKING, N^3 simulator, not speed or space.  As
a result my representation of the cube is loosing on both counts.
(yes it realy is a NxNxN array of cubes (a record of six integers!))
It is written in CLU for TOPS-20 os. 

However my rep. brought up an interesting super-groop, immagin a cube
realy made of N^3 cubies.  Each of these cubies would be a 'Miniature'
N^3 in color scheme.  Now this new device (a 'compleatly colored'
cube) is solved only when ALL cubies are oriented correctly (ie. all
have red up and blue forward), and positioned correctly.  In the 3^3
we would not only have to solve the centres, but also the imaginary
inside cubie (is it ever un-solved?)

[Questions]
  What do you (readers) think is a good display scheme for a N^3,
remember it should be useable on a 24x80 h19?  Is a N^3 simulator even
interesting?  What sort of speed improvement could be gained from a
comp-cube? with or without macros?

  Is the 'compleatly colored' cube interesting?  For what sizes is it
similar to the 'partialy colored' (normal) cube (1^3 and 2^3 for
sure...)?  Could the solution of compleat-5^3 be a solution of the
outer shell, and the inner 3^3?

  Is a simulation of a 'compleatly colored' cube interesting?  How
would one view the manny inside faces?

  What other reps for the cube are there? (other than the obvious two;
an array of color tabs, or a 3d array of cubies..)  Which reps
optimize storage, time, or simplicity to compute a twist, or even ease
of compairison?   Just occured to me that each cubie could be rep'd as
a number twixt 1 and 24 (as a cube has only 24 orientations).  This
optimization would reduce storage by a factor of 6 (not too bad!)

enough.....  enough.....

j'  <jay@eclc>
-------

Date: 24 February 1983 1815-EST (Thursday)
From: Dan Hoey at CMU-CS-A
To: Cube-Lovers at mit-mc
Subject: Whole-Cubing
Message-Id: <24Feb83 181536 DH51@CMU-CS-A>

When we describe cube positions, we typically fix the position of
the face centers.  This avoids counting different positions of the same
pattern more than once.  But suppose we wished to distinguish between
different positions of a pattern?  How should we form this group G*
of spatially oriented patterns?

A simple way of generating G* is to adjoin generators for C, the
motion group of the cube, to generators for G, the usual Rubik
group.  Generators for C were discussed in early Cube-Lovers mail
as I, J, and K, three orthogonal quarter-twists of the whole cube
in space, although there was some disagreement about which was
which.  We generate G with B, F, U, D, L, and R as usual.
Unfortunately, the two kinds of generators are not conjugates,
which was a nice thing about our generators for G.  Also the
generators do not interact very strongly.  If we have an identity
on {IJKBFUDLR}, the substring on {IJK} must be an identity in C,
and there is a simple way of transforming the substring on {BFUDLR}
to be an identity in G.

In @i<Winning Ways>, Berlekamp, Conway, and Guy described another
way of generating G*, by appending the slice moves, which they name
by mnemonic greek letters; this labeling scheme was also reported
in Hofstadter's column.  Here we have some stronger interaction
between the two kinds of generators, but they are still two
different kinds:  they are not conjugate.  This has never really
bothered the English, though; they gratuitously include half-twists
as generators as well.

I thought up a scheme involving what I will call depth-2 moves
named B2, F2, U2, D2, L2, and R2.  Readers of my reports on the
4^3 and 5^3 cubes will find these familiar.  Essentially, a depth-2
move is performed by turning a face together with its adjacent
center slice.  Thus F2 involves holding the B face immobile and
turning the rest of the cube a quarter-turn clockwise, as seen
from the front.

Clearly the depth-2 moves are M-conjugate.  Unfortunately, they do
not generate all of G*, nor even all of G.  This can be seen easily
by noticing that each depth-2 move is an even permutation of the
edge cubies, while G includes odd permutations of edges.  We can
look at this a different way by observing that a depth-2 move is
the same as a vanilla depth-1 move of the opposite face together
with a whole-cube quarter-twist.  Thus we can perform any depth-1
process using depth-2 moves, and observe the spatial orientation of
the cube at the end.  If we performed an odd number of depth-2
moves, then there were an odd number of whole-cube moves, so the
cube cannot be in its home orientation at the end.

So just what group do the depth-2 moves generate?  It turns out
that they generate precisely half of G*, the half that contains
even edge permutations.  Suppose we want to produce such a position
in G*.  First operate in G, simulating depth-1 moves as described
above, to produce a position that is an even number of whole-cube
moves from the desired one.  Then use M-conjugates of the process
	F2 L2 D2' B2' D2' F2 L2 B2 L2 U2' F2' D2' R2' B2,
which performs a whole-cube third-twist.  [This was derived from
identity I14-4].  Since all the even whole-cube moves are generated
from third-twists, this is all you need.

What can we do about generating all of G* with a set of conjugate
generators?  Sad to say, that is impossible.  For supposing we had
such generators, their cycle structures would have to be the same;
in particular, they would have to have the same permutation
parities.  Applying an odd number of such generators would yield
those parities, and applying an even number would yield even parity
on every kind of cubie.  But G* includes four different parity
classes:
		Face centers	Edges	Corners
		    even	even	even
		    even	odd	odd
		    odd		even	odd
		    odd		odd	even
so at most half of G* can be generated with a set of conjugate
generators.

Date: 24 May 1983 2218-EDT
From: James.Saxe@CMU-CS-A (C410JS30)
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC
Subject: Cubists do it . . .
Message-Id: <24May83.221845.JS30@CMU-CS-A>

. . . in over three billion positions.

Date: 25 May 1983 1001-PDT
Sender: OLE at SRI-CSL
Subject: Anybody there?
From: Ole at SRI-CSL (Ole J. Jacobsen)
To: Cube-Lovers at MIT-MC
Cc: Alan at MIT-MC
Message-ID: <[SRI-CSL]25-May-83 10:01:13.OLE>

Several months have gone by without a word from this list.
Have we lost our interest (or have I been removed from the
list)!??  What about the 5x5x5 that somebody reported having
actually touched, anyone seen any on sale?
 
Regards,
              |-+-+-|
              |O+L+E|
              |O+L+E|
              |O+L+E|
              |-+-+-|

Date: 25 May 1983 20:17 EDT
From: David C. Plummer <DCP @ MIT-MC>
Subject: Anybody there?
To: Ole @ SRI-CSL
cc: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC, ALAN @ MIT-MC

    Date: 25 May 1983 1001-PDT
    From: Ole at SRI-CSL (Ole J. Jacobsen)

    Several months have gone by without a word from this list.
    Have we lost our interest (or have I been removed from the
    list)!??  
I don't know that much of interest has happened.  Maybe I'll find
a little time some year and try a couple things. 
    What about the 5x5x5 that somebody reported having
    actually touched, anyone seen any on sale?
It will never be sold in mass.  MANY stores are stuck with 4x4x4s
that nobody will buy.

Date: Thu 26 May 83 09:27:30-PDT
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: anybody there; 5x5x5; circular
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

  There doesn't seem to be much happening with the cube, but the (at least)
3 newletters are still being published. Ideals "Rubik's Cube Newsletter" no.
3 came, marked winter, 1983.  Mostly about contests, also an article on 
computer cubing and the calendar cube.  Rubik's magazine from Hungary is 
also on issue 3, with article on contests, other games and toys, and a little
bit of mathematics.  Singmasters "Cubic Circular" is on issue 5/6 (phisically,
the forth issur), and is the best of the lot mathematically.  He describes
and talks some about rotating rings, about Tsukuda's square (and how to 
solve it), generalized Hungarian rings, the Incredi-ball (equivalent
to the corners of a Magic Dodecahedron without centers?? anyway, about
2*10**25 positions), rotating rings of cubes and tetrahedra (STarburst, 
Kaleido Puzzle, etc), some notes on the 4x4x4 (his suggested order:  2
opposite face centers, say L and R; Pair up and place the F,C,B edge
pairs on the L & R faces; D corners; Pair up FD & store them, then pair BD
edges, then put these edge pairs in place; check parity of U corners - if
odd, apply U; 3-cycle U edges to get UR & UL edge pairs;  EXAMINE, carefully,
the parity of the 4 edge pieces at UF&UB - if odd, r2D2l'D2r2, which 4 cycles
these edges; get all edges together and place; do U corners; do centers with
3-cycles like [[r,b],U].  phew.  If people are interested, he gives 
slightly more information on his method, also "Useful moves", and some other
strategies taken from the literature.  He talks about "Evisceration", 
that is, the principle of Duality, that if you replace capitals with small
letters and vice versa, in any move sequence, you turn the cube inside out -
corners become invisable centers, edges become face centers, etc.  Singmaster
uses this to transfer knowledge of 3x3x3 to 4x4x4.  He guesses the minimum
for God's Algorithm on the 4x4x4 to be about 44 "hand moves" or 66
quarter turns.  (question, from DS: how should we count moves?  "r" is
really 2 hand moves - Rr followed by R' - while Rr and even Rrl' could be
counted as a single move.)  The circular talkes about Pyraminx, and gives
God's Algorithm as between 8 and 17 moves; there was some work on that done
in the Journal of Recreational Mathematics (a minimum solution was
presented), but I can't find the issue right off hand.  Also a bunch of
Pyraminx patterns are given.  There is an article on the prehistory of
the cube,and a little on the legal problems.  Anyway, this parenthetical
paragraph is way out of hand - if anybody wants more, or more organized,
on the Circular, let me know.)
    The 5x5x5:  Yes, I saw one and played with it (a very little bit) at
Jerry Slocums' puzzle party.  I also got an add from Meffert for one, and
have sent him my money, but it hasn't come yet.  Neither has my Skewb, for
which I sent money half a year ago or so.
    What else is new?  Well, nothing much.  Sales in the stores are slow,
and the number of puzzles available has lessened.  Doug Engels rotating
circles are ready for production, and his manufacturer is mainly waiting
for the "right time" to release them.  (These are 2 overlapping rotating
circles, with 3 piece overlap and 21 pieces all together.)  He is trying
to decide between 2 colorings; if he choses the more difficult one, it 
is a fairly hard puzzle, very cube like, but harder to get the already
solved pieces "out of the way".  
   Sorry this turned out so long and rambling - I was just going to 
write a short note, and got carried away.  Happy puzzling.
   -- Stan
-------

Date: 26 May 1983 23:44 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  [DCP: 5x5 cubes]
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

Date: Thursday, 26 May 1983  13:20-EDT
From: DCP at SCRC-TENEX
To:   Bernard S. Greenberg <BSG at SCRC-TENEX>
cc:   ALAN, cmb at SCRC-TENEX
Re:   5x5 cubes

    Date: Thursday, 26 May 1983, 10:02-EDT
    From: Bernard S. Greenberg <BSG@SCRC-TENEX>

        From: David C. Plummer <DCP @ MIT-MC>
    	What about the 5x5x5 that somebody reported having
    	actually touched, anyone seen any on sale?
        It will never be sold in mass.  
    What, pray tell, are the details and source of this information?
    As if there were anything I could do with it other than stare at it...
A person at Games People Play believes Ideal will never produce a
5x5x5 commercially.  He believes the only people that seriously
bouhght the 4x4x4 were those that solved the 3x3x3 without a solution
book.  He finally said he is stuck with many 4x4x4 that he fears he
won't be able to get rid of.  The economics of making a 5x5x5 just
don't sound very good.

Date: Tue 31 May 83 09:52:44-PDT
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: economics
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

     Meffert claimed in an early letter, that he could produce his strange
products (Skewb, 5x5x5, and many others) if he had some not-to-big number
of guaranteed sales, on the order, if I remember, of 1000 or so.  He has
a "club", that is, we paid about $10 to him up front.  Then, when he is
"ready" with something, he sends an order form; they cost about $20 or so.
So far, he has done this with the Skewb, about 5 months ago, and the 5x5x5
recently.  However, we have not actually received either of these yet.
I talked to about 3 other people who ordered them and have not received 
them.  So we don't actually know whether this system will work.  We know
he has produced real, working prototypes, though, since we have seen them.
    If they ever do come, I'll put up a message here.  (Assuming I still
have access to this list.)
  -- Stan
-------

Date:  1 June 1983 1939-EDT (Wednesday)
From: Dan Hoey@CMU-CS-A
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC
Subject: Eccentric Slabism, Qubic, and S&LM
Message-Id: <01Jun83.193917.DH51@CMU-CS-A>

I don't know whether Isaacs or Singmaster know just what a
bombshell was contained in the Cubic Circular.  I am somewhat
frightened at the possibilities.

Section 1 discusses the history of metrics for N^3 puzzles and
proposes a new one.  Section 2 describes new symmetries of the
generators of the 4^3 puzzle.  Section 3 outlines a theory of
symmetry and local maxima for the 4^3 puzzle.  Section 4 indicates
directions for further work.


1. Cutism, Slabism, and Eccentric Slabism
=========================================

Let's start with the question that was posed by Stan Isaacs in his
message of 26 May:  what is a quarter-turn on the 4^3 or larger
cube?  On the N^3 puzzle, each set of N-1 parallel ``cuts'' divides
the cube into N ``slabs''.  There seem to be two straightforward
metrics.  The Slabist defines a move to be a turn of one slab with
respect to the rest of the cube.  The Cutist defines a move to be a
turn of a connected part of the cube with respect to another
connected part, the two parts being separated by a cut.  [In the
terminology I used on 2 September 1982, the Slabist counts ``slice
moves'' while the Cutist counts ``twist moves.'']

I have heretofore espoused Cutist theory.  For one thing, it agrees
with our current theories on the 3^3 in disallowing a turn of a
center slice as a single move.  This seems to be a good idea, since
the current quarter-turn theory has the advantage of conjugate
generators, which it would lack if we allowed center-slice moves.
[This is presumably not a problem for Singmaster, who allows the
squared moves, which are not conjugate.]  Another reason for Cutism
is that it makes it easier to equate positions that arise from a
whole-cube move of the N^3.  A third reason is that it makes the
parity hack (see my message of 1 June 1982) easier.  The last two
reasons are for convenience only; the arguments can still be made
in a Slabist formulation.

But as I admitted, I solve the cube as a Slabist.  Slabs are
probably convenient because they minimize the degree of each
generator.  I casually dismissed this tawdry practicality until I
was struck by Evisceration.

In the course of my examination of Evisceration I have experienced
an epiphany which converted me to Eccentric Slabism.  I now define
a move to be a turn of any slab except one whose interior contains
the center of the cube.  In other words, any slab except a center
slice.

At first glance, Eccentric Slabism looks like a hack, since there
is an excluded slab only in the case of a puzzle of odd size.  I
believe that the truth is more complicated, but the explanation is
partly beyond the scope of this note and partly beyond my
knowledge.  If you really want an answer I suggest you study
tic-tac-toe.


2. Evisceration, Inflection, and Exflection
===========================================

The (Eccentric) Slabist moves of the 4^3 puzzle form the 24-element
set Q4={B,B',b,b',...,r'}, where upper-case refers to turning a
side (an outslab move) and lower-case refers to turning the
adjacent internal slab (an inslab move).  We consider these moves
as generators of G4, the ``Theoretical Invisible Group'' [Invisible
Revenge, 9 August 1982] in which the inslabs turn the eight stomach
cubies like a 2^3 puzzle.  Thus two positions in G4 are equal if
and only if all sixty-four pieces of the cube are in their home
position and orientation.  [Actually, this is not quite the
Theoretical Invisible Group, since we do not equate positions that
differ by a whole-cube move.  I feel confident that the
identification can be performed, but I will speak of the
unidentified group here.]

Consider the following permutations on Q4:

Rotations:
  I=(FRBL)(F'R'B'L')(frbl)(f'r'b'l'),
  J=(FUBD)(F'U'B'D')(fubd)(f'u'b'd'),

Reflection:
  R=(FB')(F'B)(RL')(R'L)(UD')(U'D)(fb')(f'b)(rl')(r'l)(ud')(u'd),

Evisceration:
  V=(Ff)(F'f')(Bb)(B'b')(Rr)(R'r')(Ll)(L'l')(Uu)(U'u')(Dd)(D'd'),

Inflection:
  N=(fb')(f'b)(rl')(r'l)(ud')(u'd),

Exflection:
  X=(FB')(F'B)(RL')(R'L)(UD')(U'D).

Permutations I, J, and R are familiar generators of M, the group of
rotations and reflections of the cube.  Singmaster introduced
Evisceration, which consists of swapping each outslab with the
adjacent inslab.  I extend the list with Inflection and Exflection.
Inflection consists in swapping each inslab with the inverse of its
parallel inslab;  Exflection swaps each outslab with the inverse of
its parallel outslab.

It is well known that M is a group of automorphisms on G4.
Singmaster observed that Evisceration is also an automorphism.  I
observe that Inflection and Exflection are automorphisms, too.
Thus M4, the 192-element group generated by <I,J,R,V,N,X> is a
group of automorphisms on G4.  [Actually, since R=NX and X=VNV,
M4=<I,J,V,N>.  The group M4 is also the automorphism group of the
game of Qubic, or 4^3 tic-tac-toe.]

I began to doubt Cutism when I noticed that M4 sometimes maps cut
moves to pairs of cut moves.  I went home last night wondering why
this might be so.  I nearly got to sleep before I realized the big
news:  M4 is Q4-transitive!  Eccentric slabs are conjugate!


3. Symmetry and Local Maxima
============================

This section relies especially heavily on ``Symmetry and Local
Maxima'' [14 December 1980; available as file "MC:ALAN;CUBE S&LM"
on MIT-MC].

Following the argument in S&LM, consider the symmetry group of the
Pons Asinorum (with the face-centers each half-twisted, as is
customary).  We already know Pons is M-symmetric; by examination,
the symmetry group of Pons also contains Evisceration and
Inflection.  Thus Pons is M4-symmetric.  The result is that Pons is
a local maximum in G4.  This is the first local maximum to be found
in a close relative of Rubik's Revenge.

It is not hard to show that we can dispense with fixing the Pons in
space, and it is only slightly harder to carry out in general.
Unfortunately, I see no way of showing that Pons is a local maximum
if we ignore the stomach cubies without ignoring the corners.


4. Open problems
================

This is a pretty random collection of directions for further work.
Some of these were posed in the text.  The ones I think likely to be
impossible are labeled (*).

Conjecture:  The automorphism group of the Eccentric Slabs of the
N^3 puzzle is the same as the automorphism group of N^3
tic-tac-toe.  I don't believe this has been rigorously done for
any N>1.

Stronger conjecture:  The automorphism groups of the N^D puzzle and
N^D tic-tac-toe are the same.  (Hint: There are at least two
definitions of the N^D puzzle.  I think both work.)

Extension:  The relation between the automorphism groups is too
amazing to be accidental.  What is really going on here?

Search:  There is published literature on tic-tac-toe
automorphisms; in particular the group of automorphisms of N^D
tic-tac-toe is well known.  I seem to recall seeing some horribly
theoretical work, approaching the problem from the standpoint of
algebraic geometry or some such.  At that time I settled for
scanning the results.  Now I have questions that need a general
treatment.  If the world's leading expert on Qubic has his
bibliography on line, I think there's a reference I'd appreciate.
Actually, I'll take references from anybody and send the
compilation to any requestors.

Query:  Why must slabism be eccentric?

Query:  Can Cutism be saved?  Are cut moves conjugate in some sense?

Easy extension: Equate positions that differ by whole-cube moves.

Hard extensions (*): Equate positions that differ only internally.
Equate positions that differ only in the permutation of
like-colored face cubies.

Problem:  Prove that the Pons requires 12 quarter-turns in the 4^3
puzzle.  Ditto for 12 qtw in the N^3 puzzle(*?).  Prove or disprove
for 4D qtw in the N^D puzzle (*).

Problem:  Find the Q4-transitive subgroups of M4, then list all the
Q4-symmetric local maxima in the 4^3.

Problem:  Describe all symmetric local maxima of the N^3(*), or
place useful conditions on them.

Problem:  Demonstrate an infinite class of local maxima (Ponses?).

Final query:  Did someone ask if Cubism was dead?

	Dan Hoey
	HOEY@CMUA.ARPA


Date: Wed 22 Jun 83 09:54:45-PDT
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: 5x5x5 and "bricks"
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

    I got my 5x5x5 today, from Meffert in Hong Kong.  Whether they will 
appear in regular (puzzle) stores, I don't know, but I would assume they will
be available from him.  His address is 
         Puzzles Club
         P.O.Box 31008
         Causeway Bay
         Hong Kong.
    I haven't had a chance to do much with it yet; it seems well and strongly
made.  I have not taken it apart because I don't know how to do it safely.
The corners seem to have the usual flanges.  The center edges seem to have
a very deep tab, perhaps to go completely through the second layer.  The
non-center middle pieces seem to be some kind of "caps" over the edge
extensions.  That's all I can tell from "peeking" in the cracks.
    One of the suggestions in Singmaster's "Cubic Circular" was to take
a regular 3x3x3 and tape over some cracks to limit the movement.  The idea
is to take each pair of cubies and tape them together into one "brick", 2x1x1.
If you do it right, it makes a very interesting variation.  For taping, I used
labels from another cube; that way the colors can be make to look right. 
The pattern I used is as follows:
   Choose a corner.  It will be the only single cubie (except for a center).
Make the other 2 cubies along each edge projecting from the chosen corner,
into one brick (by putting tape on both cracks separating the cubies).
Now, in each of the 3 faces bordering the chosen corner are 4 untaped
facies in a square.  Tape to make 2 adjacent bricks (don't forget the
other side of the edge bricks).  Note that when you have done the first
face, you will have 3 parallel bricks; the other 2 faces should have
their parallel bricks with the "same handedness" - If you look down from
the chosen corner, the 3 faces should have rotational symmetry. (I haven't
tried an irregular pattern yet; it might have different properties than
this one).  Anyway, all that is left is a 2x2x2 sub-cube, diagonally
across from the original chosen corner.  Picture that as 4 1x1x2 bricks
piled with one pair crossways from the other.  One brick, of course, includes
the very center of the cube (invisible), and will leave the only other untaped
facie - namely one center.  Which one is the center doesn't matter, but I
think there is a clockwise/counter-clockwise (relative to the outer handedness)
choice here.  
    When all that is done, you will have a very interesting new puzzle. Any
twist must include the chosen corner!  Home position is easy to recognize -
it is when the chosen corner is back in its original place, and the bricks
around it are in their positions (not necessarily with the correct colors
together).  I have not solved it yet, but it seems that the sub-cube is
both hard to mix up, and easy to fix once you have.  It looks as if all the
interesting moves can be done with just the 3 faces surrounding the chosen
corner.
   Have fun..
     -- Stan
-------

Date:     23 Jun 83 12:20:43-EDT (Thu)
From: Stuart Stirling <silver.emory@Rand-Relay>
Return-Path: <Silver%emory.Emory@Rand-Relay>
Subject:  Singmaster's "Cubic Circular"
To: cube-lovers@Mc
Cc: silver.Emory@Rand-Relay
Via:  Emory; 23 Jun 83 23:31-PDT

Where is this available?

	Stuart Stirling			{sb1,sb6,msdc,gatech}!emory!silver
	Math and Computer Science	silver.emory@rand-relay
	Emory University
	Atlanta, GA 30322 		404/329-5637

Date: 27 June 1983 19:04 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  Bizarre Bricks
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

A bizarre variant of the "bricks" described by Isaacs last week is
currently sitting on the front desk of the SIPB office at MIT.  Imagine
that you took three cubies along any edge of a cube and welded them
together (perhaps by taping over the cracks as Singmaster suggests).  Now
imagine that you perform the same mutilation on a second cube.  Now imagine
that you arrange to \share/ the same 1 x 1 x 3 cubie between the two cubes.
The resulting arrangement looks like this from above:

XXX
XXX
XXXXX
  XXX
  XXX

A moment's thought should convince you that sharing the 1 x 1 x 3 cubie has
done \nothing/ to increase the difficulty of the puzzle.  Amazing what
lengths puzzle manufacturers will go to to try and squeeze a few more bucks
out of the Cube Craze.

Date: Tue 28 Jun 83 09:04:29-PDT
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: Cubic Circular address
To: silver.emory@RAND-RELAY.ARPA
cc: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

   The address for the "Cubic Circular" is indeed that of David Singmaster:
     David Singmaster
     87 Rodenhurst Road
     London, SW4 8AF  ENGLAND.
   Hope this helps.
     -- Stan
-------

Date: Thu 30 Jun 83 10:07:06-PDT
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: double cube
To: alan@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

  I've heard of the double cube - do you have any idea where to buy one?
Another strange cube I've seen, is a normal 3x3x3 with extra cubies glued on
three faces so that it looks like a 4x4x4; of course, it twists in a very
lopsided manner.  The main problem in making one (which I have not solved)
is how to grind or cut the flanges off cubies before gluing.  Without
equipment, can anyone think of a good, practical way to do this?
 -- Stan
-------

Date: 30 June 1983 20:47 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  [Barry Margolin: double vision]
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

Date: 30 June 1983 16:57 edt
From: Barry Margolin at MIT-MULTICS
To:   Alan Bawden <ALAN>
Re:   double vision

Well, I got it at the Harrod's department store in London (they say you
can buy ANYTHING at Harrod's).  I was in Games People Play last week and
didn't see it, so maybe it hasn't gotten to this country yet.

Sorry I can't be of more help.
                                        barmar

Date: 21 July 1983 1450-PDT (Thursday)
From: cline at AEROSPACE (Ken Cline)
Subject: put me on your mailing list!
To: cube-lovers at mit-mc

  Please include me (CLINE@AEROSPACE) in your Rubik's Cube mailing-list.
My address will change in September to SCGVAXD!4CCVAX!KCLINE@CIT-VAX,
but I will let you know when this occurs.

			Thank you,
			Ken Cline


Date: Monday, 21 November 1983  10:08-EST
To:   cube-lovers at mc
From: BSG
Subject: Meffert cube availability

Someone asked me from afar where to get the hairy Meffert
cube-like things.  It was a long time ago that I ordered a
five-cube from somewhere in Los Angeles.  Would somebody care to
repeat the name and address of that store, or some other stores?
Thank you.

Date: 21 November 1983 20:30 EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  Rubik's cube cornered
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

>From mit-eddie!genrad!decvax!dartvax!andyb Tue Oct 25 00:03:36 1983
Relay-Version: version B 2.10.1 6/24/83; site mit-vax.UUCP
Path: mit-vax!mit-eddie!genrad!decvax!dartvax!andyb
From: andyb@dartvax.UUCP
Newsgroups: net.puzzle
Subject: Rubik's cube cornered
Message-ID: <307@dartvax.UUCP>
Date: Tue, 25-Oct-83 00:03:36 EDT
Article-I.D.: dartvax.307
Posted: Tue Oct 25 00:03:36 1983
Date-Received: Tue, 25-Oct-83 08:53:25 EDT
Lines: 7

It is possible to solve the corners of the Rubik's Cube in no more
than 11 turns.  Over 4/5 of all possible patterns can be solved in
9 turns or fewer, but over half take a full 9 turns.  Ten turns are
enough to solve more than 99.9% of all scrambled states.  (Only
2,644 states require 11 turns).
 
This from L. John Kelley, solver of the Magic Pyramid.

Date: 23 November 1983 17:01 EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  [genrad!decvax!dartvax!andyb: Rubik's cube cornered]
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

Date: 23 Nov 1983 06:56:09-EST
From: genrad!decvax!dartvax!andyb at mit-eddie,
Received: by decvax.UUCP (4.12/4.2)
	id AA26306; Wed, 23 Nov 83 03:10:45 est
Date: Wed, 23 Nov 83 03:10:45 est
From: decvax!dartvax!andyb
Message-Id: <8311230810.AA26306@decvax.UUCP>
To: decvax!genrad!mit-eddie!ALAN@MIT-MC, genrad!decvax!dartvax!andyb@MIT-EDDIE
Subject: Rubik's cube cornered
Cc: ALAN@MIT-MC

Alan:

Feel free to rebroadcast any of this discussion to the cube-lovers list.
(Could you enroll me on the list, also?)  

Both solutions were generated by "brute force", using a fairly short PL1
program running on a VAX.  The solutions are tables which express the
information "if the pyramid/cube's state is X, the best move is Y" for all
possible states.  In that sense, they are optimal solutions, but if you wanted
to know the best solution for any particular state, you would have to carry the
entire table around with you.  Perhaps we could publish the list :-)   
 
The Magic Pyramid is the one sold under the name "Pyraminx" -- it's the 
tetrahedron that rotates in only 4 planes.
 
The cube solution is for corners only, with no reference to centers or edges.
You could think of it as a complete solution to the "Pocket Cube", which is
a 2x2x2 cube.
 
Glad to help.
                             Andy Behrens (& L. Kelley)
                             decvax!dartvax!andyb

Date: Sat 26 Nov 83 22:35:59-EST
From: Tai <Jin@COLUMBIA-20.ARPA>
Subject: cube solvers
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Jin@COLUMBIA-20.ARPA


hi, are there any programs out there that solve the cube?  i would like
to get a copy of the source if possible.  also, are there any general
methods for solving the cube?

thanks...tai
-------

Date: 29 February 1984 23:08-EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  [CL.BOYER: A Programming Language for Group Theory (Dept. of Math)]
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

Some of the group theory hackers amoung us might be interested in this
abstract.  Of course the talk has already happened, but perhaps one of you
knows more about this?

Date: Sun 26 Feb 84 17:06:23-CST
From: Bob Boyer <CL.BOYER at UTEXAS-20.ARPA>
To:   AIList
Re:   A Programming Language for Group Theory (Dept. of Math)

        [Forwarded from the UTexas-20 bboard by Laws@SRI-AI.]

            DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS COLLOQUIUM
          A Programming Language for Group Theory
                        John Cannon
        University of Sydney and Rutgers University
                 Monday, February 27, 4pm

     The past 25 years has seen the emergence of a small but vigorous branch of
group theory which is concerned with the discovery and implementation of
algorithms for computing structural information about both finite and infinite
groups.  These techniques have now reached the stage where they are finding
increasing use both in group theory research and in its applications.  In order
to make these techniques more generally available, I have undertaken the
development of what in effect is an expert system for group theory.

     Major components of the system include a high-level user language (having
a Pascal-like syntax) and an extensive library of group theory algorithms.  The
system breaks new ground in that it permits efficient computation with a range
of different types of algebraic structures, sets, sequences, and mappings.
Although the system has only recently been released, already it has been
applied to problems in topology, algebraic number theory, geometry, graphs
theory, mathematical crystalography, solid state physics, numerical analysis
and computational complexity as well as to problems in group theory itself.

Received: From ti-csl.csnet by csnet-relay;  25 Jun 84 20:44 EDT
Date:     Mon, 25 Jun 84 14:30 CST
From:     Gil Gamesh <dnichols%ti-csl.csnet@csnet-relay.arpa>
To:       cube-lovers@mit-mc.arpa
Subject:  Recent Activity?

Is this mailing list still alive? Does anyone know of any
recent activity in the cube world? Are there still any
Cube Newsletters that anyone knows of? Has anyone ever seen
any of the many puzzles I read about in places such as 'Scientific American' and 'Omni', ex.
the Skewb, the Double Pyramid, the 5x5x5 cube, etc.?

Dan Nichols
Dnichols.ti-csl@csnet-relay

Date: Tue 26 Jun 84 11:00:18-PDT
From: ISAACS@SRI-KL.ARPA
Subject: cubes dead?
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

I don't see much about cubes these days.  And, as a puzzle collector, I'm still
looking.  Singmaster and Ideal have both discontinued their newsletters; 
however, the Hungarian "Rubics Magazine" still is being published.  It has
broadened somewhat to talk more about puzzles in general.  I also found last
Saturday, that there is a childrens cartoon about Rubics Cube - in fact
the cube is the hero.  It is truly awful.
   As Alan says, most of the objects mentionsed have been seen.  But they
are hard to get nowadays.  Meffert, in Hong Kong, is silent.  I ordered
a dozen or so 5x5x5's more than 6 months ago, and have yet to hear anything.
Or get my money back.  And he never sent me any skewbs.  
  Well, it was an exciting couple of years in the puzzle world; now, I guess,
things are more normal.  Stores no longer have puzzle sections, and I have to
write to specialty places to find new puzzles.  For me, wood puzzles are back
in.  I've been digging up old puzzle patents, and hope to find someone to make
some of the puzzles described for me.
  -- Stan Isaacs
    (isaacs@hplabs)
-------

Received: from SCRC-CONCORD by SCRC-STONY-BROOK via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 54973; Tue 26-Jun-84 10:22:30-EDT
Date: Tue, 26 Jun 84 10:20 EDT
From: "Bernard S. Greenberg" <BSG@SCRC-QUABBIN.ARPA>
Subject: Recent Activity?
To: ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
In-Reply-To: The message of 25 Jun 84 23:23-EDT from Alan Bawden <ALAN at MIT-MC>
Message-ID: <840626102050.3.BSG@CONCORD.SCRC.Symbolics>

    Date: 25 June 1984 23:23-EDT
    From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>

    Date:     Mon, 25 Jun 84 14:30 CST
    From:     Gil Gamesh <dnichols%ti-csl.csnet@csnet-relay.arpa>
    Subject:  Recent Activity?

    Is this mailing list still alive? Does anyone know of any recent activity
    in the cube world?
More significantly, has anyone heard of any progress in the
important theoretical problems (God's number/algorithm)?

Date: 28 June 1984 00:17-EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  The Cube meets Massive Parallelism
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC
cc: CM-I @ MIT-MC
In-reply-to: Msg of Tue 26 Jun 84 10:20 EDT from Bernard S. Greenberg <BSG at SCRC-QUABBIN.ARPA>

Since I spend most of my time these days thinking about designing and
programming massively parallel computers, it occured to me to think about
applying such machines to exploring the Cube's Group.  Here are some
preliminary thoughts.

When we say "massively parallel" we are talking at least a quarter million
simple processors.  This is enough processors to give all of the positions
5 or fewer quarter twists away from home their own processor.  A million
processors would be enough to get up to 6 Qs, but lets not push our luck.
Given a machine like the MIT Connection Machine we could set up a database
in which every processor representing a configuration knew the addresses ot
the 12 other processors representing its 12 closest neighbors, in almost no
time at all.  (Processors 5 Qs away from home would have null pointers for
their unrepresented 6 Q neighbors.)  A conservative statement would be
that operations like generating a list of all identities of length 10 or
less (which has previously taken us hours to accomplish) could be done so
fast that the machine could generate output faster than you could read it.

Since this is all so absurdly easy, there must be ways to go beyond this to
generate significant new results using this (promised) new kind of
hardware.  Perhaps Dave Christman, who is both a cube hacker, and a
designer of algorithms for massively parallel machines, could be persuaded
to devote some spare cycles to figuring out ways to brute-force the Cube
using such a machine.

Date: Fri 13 Jul 84 15:24:23-PDT
From: Micheal Hewett <HEWETT@SU-SCORE.ARPA>
Subject: Please add me to your mailing list
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

Thanks.

Mike Hewett    (HEWETT@SU-SCORE.ARPA)
-------

Date: Tue 24 Jul 84 15:30:18-PDT
From: Haym Hirsh <HAYM@SU-SCORE.ARPA>
Subject: God's number
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA

Can anyone verify a rumor - that some Princeton student, as an
undergraduate thesis, solved the problem of how far from start one
can get (i.e., the longest sequence God's algorithm would give for
any position)?  The number I heard was 26.

Haym
-------

Date: 1 Aug 1984 11:57-EDT
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@NRL-AIC>
Subject: Pocket cube program
To: cube-lovers at mit-mc

The UNIX-SOURCES@BRL mailing list recently forwarded this note from
Usenet.

    Date:     Tue, 31 Jul 84 13:47:22 EDT
    From:     news@BRL-TGR.ARPA
    Subject:  /usr/spool/news/net/sources/397

    Path: brl-tgr!seismo!hao!hplabs!zehntel!ihnp4!ihnet!eklhad
    From: eklhad@ihnet.UUCP (K. A. Dahlke)
    Subject: solve the 2x2x2 Rubix cube in a minimum number of moves
    Date: Mon, 30-Jul-84 10:49:48 EDT
    Article-I.D.: ihnet.142
    Organization: AT&T Bell Labs, Naperville, IL

    After solving the Rubix cube 4 years ago, I turned my attention to
    more interesting (and more difficult) questions.
    How can one find the minimum path solution for an arbitrary position?
    How far away is the farthest positions?
    Is there one position diametrically opposed to start,
    or does it fan out into billions?
    Recently, I have started playing again, and have made some progress.
    Here is a computer program (C/unix) which solves the 2x2x2 cube
    in a minimum number of moves.
    The 2 cube is not as common as the 3 cube, but it is commercially
    available.
    If you only have a 3 cube (standard), just ignore the sides and centers,
    and use the corners.
    This effectively simulates a 2 cube.
    Thanks to ATT-BL for the use of their computing facilities.
    Later versions may come, if i am ambitious.
    Unfortunately, my program cannot be expanded to handle the 3 cube.
    Nobody has that much memory/CPU time.
    I will have to come up with something better.
    Feel free to contact me with any ideas about this subject.

----------------------------------------------------------------

The note is followed by about 1000 lines of c code that I can make
available if you want it.

Unfortunately, the program seems to believe that there are 870 * 729 =
634230 positions of the 2^3, while assiduous cube lovers realize the
number is actually (7! / 2) * 3^6 = 2520 * 729 = 1837080 positions.
The number 870 = 29 * 30 is strange.  I guess it is an approximation of
6! + 5! + 4! + 3! + 2! = 872, since the code for encoding a position as
an integer contains a table of those factorials.

Dan

Date: 7 Aug 1984 19:24-EDT
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@NRL-AIC>
Subject: The pocket cube: correction, calculation, and conjectures
To: cube-lovers at MIT-MC

Well, maybe this list is dead after all, if I can tell you there are
(7!/2)(3^6) positions of the pocket cube, and have it stand for a week.
The correct number is of course (7!)(3^6) = 3674160, since the
generators are odd.

But not being one to eat crow with a straight face, I have hacked the
good hack, so I can give you the exact number P(N) of pocket cube
positions exactly N quarter-turns from solved.  (This was done in
September 1981 for the half-twist metric; see the archives.)  I have
also computed the number L(N) of local maxima at each distance.  These
numbers are given below.

         N     P(N)     L(N)	
         0        1        0
         1        6        0
         2       27        0
         3      120        0
         4      534        0
         5     2256        0
         6     8969        0
         7    33058       16
         8   114149       53
         9   360508      260
        10   930588     1460
        11  1350852    34088
        12   782536   402260
        13    90280    88636
        14      276      276

An approach for dealing with these numbers (suggested to me by Dale
Peterson) is to form the Poincare polynomial

         p(x) = SUM P(i) x^i
                 i

in hopes that it can be factored nicely.  Unfortunately, this doesn't
work out--with the exception of the obvious factor (x+1), p(x) is
irreducible.  I have also tried to decompose p(x) using the power
             (1+x)^2
series for ------------, which agrees with the first five terms of p(x)
           3 - 2(1+x)^2
due to the lack of non-trivial identities.  I haven't found any good
ways of expressing p(x), but there may be something there.  The point
of all of this is that it could conceivably lead to a conjecture--or
even a derivation--of God's number for the 3^3 puzzle.

I might pass along another fuzzy recollection from a year and a half
ago, in hopes that it is more informative than incorrect.  Dale
mentioned another classical method for dealing with group diameters.
It seems there is a class of groups, called reflection groups, for
which tight diameter bounds can be derived.  A reflection group is a
group of matrices with eigenvalues of plus and minus one.  Some
properties generalize to pseudo-reflection groups, where the
eigenvalues all have complex magnitude one.  We managed to construct
isomorphisms between the 3^3 edge group and a reflection group, and
between the corner group and a pseudo-reflection group.  As I recall,
he was fairly certain that the full cube group did not qualify, but
that was beyond my depth.

So if you think cubes are dead, remember it's not because the
results are all in.

Dan

Date: 20 Aug 1984 4:34-EDT
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@NRL-AIC>
Subject: The pocket cube and corners of the full cube
To: cube-lovers at mc
Cc: umcp-cs!seismo!ihnp4!ihnet!eklhad at NRL-AIC

Karl Dahlke, the author of the pocket cube program I mentioned on 1
August, sent me a note about the appearance of the unusual constant 870
in his program.  It turns out that the program is correct, and the
constant arises in an interesting way.

Recall that the pocket cube has 729 orientations and 5040 permutations
of the pieces.  Dahlke had noticed that the ``reflections and
rotations'' of a position need not be stored, since they are the same
distance from start.  By reflections and rotations, he means the
S-conjugates, where S is the six-element symmetry group of the pocket
cube with one corner fixed.

It turns out that the pocket cube has 2 permutations with a six-element
symmetry group, 16 permutations with a three-element symmetry group,
138 permutations with a two-element symmetry group, and 4884
permutations with a one-element symmetry group.  Thus the number of
permutations that are distinct up to S-conjugacy is 2 + 16/2 + 138/3 +
4884/6 = 870.

This discussion of symmetry recalls a question I have meant to propose
to Cube-Lovers for some time:  How many positions are there in Rubik's
Cube?  We know from Ideal that the number is somewhat over three
billion.  Most cube lovers will tell you a number of about 43
quintillion.  But I really don't see why we should count twelve
distinct positions at one quarter-twist from solved--all twelve are
essentially the same position.  So the question, suitably rephrased, is
of the number of positions that are distinct up to conjugacy in M, the
48-element symmetry group of the cube.  I think this is an interesting
question, but I don't see any particularly easy way of answering it.
My best guess is that it involves a case-by-case analysis of the 98
subgroups of M, or at least the 33 conjugacy classes of those
subgroups.  In ``Symmetry and Local Maxima'', Jim Saxe and I examined
five of the classes, which we called M, C, AM, H, and T.

Even finding the numbers for the pocket cube is a little tricky.  If we
limit ourselves to symmetry in S, I believe the pocket cube has 2
positions with a six-element symmetry group, 160 positions with a
three-element symmetry group, 3882 positions with a two-element
symmetry group, and 3670116 positions with a one-element symmetry
group, for 613062 positions distinct up to S-conjugacy.  But the
numbers for M-conjugacy are still elusive; I am not even sure how to
deal with factoring out whole-cube moves in the analysis.  I hope to
find time to write a program for it.

I expanded my pocket cube program to deal with the corner group of
Rubik's cube.  This group is 24 times as large as the group of the
pocket cube, having 3^7 * 8! = 88179840 elements.  The number of
elements P(N) and local maxima L(N) at each (quarter-twist) distance N
from solved are given below.

                 N         P(N)        L(N)
                 0            1           0
                 1           12           0
                 2          114           0
                 3          924           0
                 4         6539           0
                 5        39528           0
                 6       199926         114
                 7       806136         600
                 8      2761740       17916
                 9      8656152       10200
                10     22334112       35040
                11     32420448      818112
                12     18780864     9654240
                13      2166720     2127264
                14         6624        6624

The alert reader will notice that rows 10 through 14 contain values
exactly 24 times as large as those for the pocket cube.  This is not
surprising, given that the groups are identical except for the position
of the entire assembly in space, and each generator of the corner cube
is identical to the inverse of the corresponding generator for the
opposite face except for the whole-cube position.  Thus when solving a
corner-cube position at 10 qtw or more from solved, it can be solved as
a pocket cube, making the choice between opposite faces in such a way
that the whole-cube position comes out right with no extra moves.

Dan

Date: 22 Aug 1984 18:06-EDT
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@NRL-AIC>
Subject: An outer automorphism of the cube group
To: cube-lovers at mit-mc

If you have a Rubik's cube where all the edges flip on each
quarter-turn, you can solve it by using bifocals when it's odd.

I noticed this while drawing a Hasse diagram of the subgroups of M.  It
turns out that M has a similar automorphism, where the odd elements are
reflected through the center of the cube.

If anyone wants the Hasse diagram, I can send it--it takes about 30
minutes to draw in the lines, for which directions are included.

If you know whether there are other outer automorphisms of M, please
let me know.

Dan

Date: Fri, 7 Sep 84  9:16:44 EDT
From: Michael Frishkopf <mfrishko@BBNCCY.ARPA>
Subject: list request
To: CUBE-LOVERS@mit-mc.arpa
Cc: mfrishkopf@BBNCCY.ARPA

Dear sir/ms:

Please place me on your arpa mailing list:

mfrishkopf@bbnccy
    
Thank you,
Michael Frishkopf


Received: by gyre.ARPA (4.12/4.7)
	id AA09303; Mon, 1 Oct 84 21:10:44 edt
Date: Mon, 1 Oct 84 21:10:44 edt
From: Rehmi Post <rehmi@gyre>
Message-Id: <8410020110.AA09303@gyre.ARPA>
To: cube-lovers@mc
Subject: Archives

Does anyone have copies (partial or otherwise) of the cube-lovers mailing
list? I need it as a reference generator/thought provoker, and if I could
ftp it all from someone, it'd be nice...

			- rehmi at maryland

Date: 5 October 1984 17:07-EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN @ MIT-MC>
Subject:  Moleculon wins a round!
To: CUBE-LOVERS @ MIT-MC

From today's Boston Globe:

DOVER, Del.  ---  A massachusetts firm that claimed it had the first patent
on the Rubik's cube puzzle has won a patent infringement suit against CBS
Inc. and its subsidiary Ideal Toy Corp., which manufactures the puzzle.  US
District Court Judge Walter Stapleton issued the ruling Tuesday, validating
the patent held by Moleculon Research Corp. of Cambridge, Mass.  The ruling
said CBS infringed on the patent with its various Rubik's cube products.
Moleculon's attorney, Robert Perry, said if no appeal is filed, the case
would continue to a second trial to determine monetary damages.  Moleculon
is seeking $60 million in damages and an undetermined amount in profits
from Rubik's cube and related sales.

Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 08 OCT 84 08:57:05 PDT
Date: 8 Oct 84 08:58:06 PDT (Monday)
From: Lynn.es@XEROX.ARPA
Subject: Re: Moleculon wins a round!
In-reply-to: ALAN's message of 5 Oct 84 18:01 EDT
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Lynn.es@XEROX.ARPA

A similar article in the LA Times went on to say that the fellow at
Moleculon had patented a 2x2 cube held together with magnets, but
mention was made in the patent of larger cubes and mechanical linkages.
How specific the mentions were is not clear.  He was also quoted to the
effect that they do not dispute that Rubik invented the present cube,
but it infringes on their patent.  Moleculon apparently offered to sell
rights to their toy to Ideal before Rubik and were turned down.
/Don Lynn

Received: from SCRC-DUPAGE by SCRC-STONY-BROOK via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 185428; Tue 26-Feb-85 11:09:54-EST
Date: Tue, 26 Feb 85 11:00 EST
From: Richard Pavelle <RP@SCRC-QUABBIN.ARPA>
Subject: cube-freak
To: cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: rp@SCRC-QUABBIN.ARPA
Message-ID: <850226110043.5.RP@DUPAGE.SCRC.Symbolics.COM>

I received a letter from

Georges Helm
76, Bomicht
4936 Bascharage
Luxembourg

who seems to have outdone most of us. He has collected 14000
pages of material on the 3x3 and its variations and has composed
a bibliography on them. He would like to communicate with anyone
who is still interested and is willing to swap material. 

Received: from Gamay.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 01 MAR 85 08:55:07 PST
Date: 1 Mar 85 08:54:47 PST (Friday)
From: Hoffman.es@XEROX.ARPA
Subject: 5-by-5-by-5
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Hoffman.es@XEROX.ARPA

Anyone have a written solution algorithm for the 5-by-5-by-5 cube?  I
got mine a year and a half or so ago from Meffert in Hong Kong by mail
order.  After a couple of weeks of just trying out "pretty patterns" on
it, I finally got up the nerve to mess it up.  Well, of course, it's
never been altogether solved since.  (I was never a great cube wizard.)
It sits on display as the base of my cube tower, with those few nagging
cubies out of place.  I haven't touched it in many months.

--Rodney Hoffman

Received: from SCRC-NEPONSET by SCRC-VALLECITO via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 371; Fri 1-Mar-85 17:16:32-EST
Date: Fri, 1 Mar 85 17:16 EST
From: David C. Plummer in disguise <DCP@SCRC-QUABBIN.ARPA>
Subject: 5-by-5-by-5
To: Hoffman.es@XEROX.ARPA, Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
In-Reply-To: The message of 1 Mar 85 11:54-EST from Hoffman.es@XEROX.ARPA
Message-ID: <850301171626.2.NFEP@NEPONSET.SCRC.Symbolics.COM>

    Date: 1 Mar 85 08:54:47 PST (Friday)
    From: Hoffman.es@XEROX.ARPA

    Anyone have a written solution algorithm for the 5-by-5-by-5 cube?  I
    got mine a year and a half or so ago from Meffert in Hong Kong by mail
    order.  After a couple of weeks of just trying out "pretty patterns" on
    it, I finally got up the nerve to mess it up.  Well, of course, it's
    never been altogether solved since.  (I was never a great cube wizard.)
    It sits on display as the base of my cube tower, with those few nagging
    cubies out of place.  I haven't touched it in many months.

It took me about half an hour to solve the 4x4x4 by generalizing
techniques for the 3x3x3.  I think many of us convinced ourselves that
the 5x5x5 is just a similar extension.  The generalization is one of
those "Aha!" insights. 

Unfortunately for me, I've never seen a 5x5x5 to prove myself.

Received: from WISCVM.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA; 11 MAR 85 23:00:01 EST
Received: from (ENG130)BOSTONU.BITNET by WISCVM.ARPA on 03/11/85 at
  21:58:19 CST
Date: 11 Mar 85   22:51 EST
From:      <eng130%BOSTONU.bitnet@WISCVM.ARPA>
Subject: Please remove me from this list
To:  cube-lovers@mit-mc

-----
  Please take me off this mailing list.  Thanks alot.
-----

Received: from csnet-relay by MIT-MC.ARPA;  3 APR 85 17:23:55 EST
Received: from ti-csl by csnet-relay.csnet id aa14999; 3 Apr 85 17:00 EST
Date:  3 Apr 1985 1028-CST
From: Dan <NICHOLS%ti-csl.csnet@csnet-relay.arpa>
Subject: articles help
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.ARPA
Received: from csl60 by ti-csl; Wed, 3 Apr 85 13:41 CST


I would very much like to obtain a copy of the following
articles. If anyone can send me a copy or give me more
information about where and how to obtain them, I will
really appreciate it. Thanks.

Eidswick, Jack - How to solve the nxnxn cube.
    Mathematics and Statistics Dept - Univ of Nebraska 1982

Kamack, HJ & T R Keane - The Rubik Tesseract -
    Unpublished manuscript 1982

Kim, Scott E - The Impossible Skew Quadrilateral: A Four-Dimensional
   Optical Illusion - Proceedings of 1978 AAAS Symposium on Hypergraphics:
   Visualizing Complex Relationships in Arts & Sciences

Marx, George, Eva Gajzago, & Peter Gnadig - The Universe of Rubik's Cube
   European Journal of Physics 3 (1982) pp 34-43

 Daniel Nichols
 1721 E. Frankford Rd
 Apt. 1514
 Carrollton, TX 75007

 ARPA: dnichols%ti-csl@csnet-relay
 CSNET: dnichols@ti-csl
 UUCP: {ut-sally,smu,texsun,rice}!waltz!dnichols
 VOICE: 214-492-3275
-------



Received: from csnet-relay by MIT-MC.ARPA; 24 APR 85 18:42:16 EST
Received: from ti-csl by csnet-relay.csnet id ab16901; 24 Apr 85 14:45 EST
Date: 24 Apr 1985 1051-CST
From: Dan <NICHOLS%ti-csl.csnet@csnet-relay.arpa>
Subject: information requests
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.ARPA
Received: from csl60 by ti-csl; Wed, 24 Apr 85 12:49 CST

1.  Does anyone know of anywhere I can obtain any of the following
    puzzles:
           skewb
           pyraminx crystal
           pyraminx ball
           pyraminx ultimate
           double pyramid

2. I would very much like to obtain copies of Singmaster's Cubic
   Circular. I have the first 4 issues, but saw a reference to there
   being 8 volumes. I would be glad to pay for copying and postage. Can
   anyone help?

3. Does anyone know the status of Meffert's Puzzle Club?

4. Do Singmaster or Doug Hofstadter have net addresses?


   Thanks for any help.


 Daniel Nichols
 1721 E. Frankford Rd
 Apt. 1514
 Carrollton, TX 75007

 ARPA: dnichols%ti-csl@csnet-relay
 CSNET: dnichols@ti-csl
 UUCP: {ut-sally,smu,texsun,rice}!waltz!dnichols
 VOICE: 214-492-3275




-------


Received: from CISL-SERVICE-MULTICS.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA; 30 APR 85 09:51:49 EDT
Received: FROM HIS-PHOENIX-MULTICS.ARPA BY CISL-SERVICE-MULTICS.ARPA WITH dial; 30 APR 1985 09:47:08 EDT
Acknowledge-To:  "Craig L. Senft" <Senft@HIS-PHOENIX-MULTICS.ARPA>
Date:  Tue, 30 Apr 85 06:44 MST
From:  "Craig L. Senft" <Senft@HIS-PHOENIX-MULTICS.ARPA>
Subject:  Re: information requests
To:  Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
cc:  Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
In-Reply-To:  Message of 30 Apr 85 01:09 MST from "Alan Bawden"
Message-ID:  <850430134407.956530@HIS-PHOENIX-MULTICS.ARPA>

Please remove me from Cube-Lovers mailing list.  Thank you,


 ==cls==

Date: Tue, 30 Apr 85 17:01:09 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC>
Subject:  information requests
To: Senft.Multics%PCO-Multics@MIT-MULTICS
cc: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC
In-reply-to: Msg of Tue 30 Apr 85 06:44 MST from Craig L. Senft <Senft at HIS-PHOENIX-MULTICS.ARPA>
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC].477537.850430.ALAN>

    Date: Tue, 30 Apr 85 06:44 MST
    From: Craig L. Senft <Senft at HIS-PHOENIX-MULTICS.ARPA>
    Please remove me from Cube-Lovers mailing list.  Thank you,

Removed.

Received: from Xerox.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 31 May 85 18:33:35 EST
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 31 MAY 85 15:31:50 PDT
Date: 31 May 85 15:31:46 PDT (Friday)
From: Hoffman.ES@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Re: information requests
In-reply-to: <[MIT-MC].476352.850430.ALAN>
To: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
cc: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <850531-153150-1581@Xerox>

Dan,

Did you learn anything about Skewb availability or the status of
Meffert's club and company?  In January, 1983, I sent Meffert a money
order for a skewb and followed up twice with letters in Fall '83 and
January '84.  I never heard a thing.  However, in August '83 (after Stan
Isaacs said it worked for him), I sent Meffert money for the
5-by-5-by-5, and it arrived very promptly!  I would LOVE a Skewb.  Have
you even seen one?

I do have a pyraminx ball and a small double pyramid.  I don't recall
what stores I found those in a couple of years ago, but they were local
toy or department stores.

Doug Hofstadter usually is connected to the net, but I haven't
corresponded with him in a year and a half, and I know he's moved since
then.  Isn't he visiting UMass just now?  If you ever get hold of Scott
Kim, he usually knows how to reach DRH.

--Rodney

Received: from Xerox.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 31 May 85 18:36:52 EST
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 31 MAY 85 15:34:09 PDT
Date: 31 May 85 15:34:05 PDT (Friday)
From: Hoffman.ES@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Re: information requests
In-reply-to: Your message of 24 Apr 1985 1051-CST
To: Dan <NICHOLS%ti-csl.CSNet@CSNet-Relay.ARPA>
cc: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <850531-153409-1583@Xerox>

Dan,

Did you learn anything about Skewb availability or the status of
Meffert's club and company?  In January, 1983, I sent Meffert a money
order for a skewb and followed up twice with letters in Fall '83 and
January '84.  I never heard a thing.  However, in August '83 (after Stan
Isaacs said it worked for him), I sent Meffert money for the
5-by-5-by-5, and it arrived very promptly!  I would LOVE a Skewb.  Have
you even seen one?

I do have a pyraminx ball and a small double pyramid.  I don't recall
what stores I found those in a couple of years ago, but they were local
toy or department stores.

Doug Hofstadter usually is connected to the net, but I haven't
corresponded with him in a year and a half, and I know he's moved since
then.  Isn't he visiting UMass just now?  If you ever get hold of Scott
Kim, he usually knows how to reach DRH.

--Rodney

Date: Mon, 15 Jul 85 16:02:41 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
Subject:  [alice!amo: Cube-lovers]
To: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC.ARPA].576851.850715.ALAN>

Date: Mon, 15 Jul 85 05:54:21 pdt
From: alice!amo at Berkeley
To:   alan
Re:   Cube-lovers

You might like to post the following message to the Cube-lovers list:

One of the best sources for various "twisting puzzles" (and purportedly
the only remaining supplier of the 5x5x5 cubes, which he is
selling for $ 15 plus postage) is

  Dr. Christoph Bandelow 
  Haarholzer Strasse 13
  4630 Bochum-Stiepel
  West Germany
  phone: 0234-797794

I have just obtained two 5x5x5 cubes from him.

Received: from mitre-bedford by MIT-MC.ARPA 30 Jul 85 12:50:06 EDT
Date: Tuesday, 30 Jul 1985 12:47-EDT
From: pes@Mitre-Bedford
To: ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA
Cc: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC
Subject: Re: The elusive 5x5x5
In-reply-to: Your message of Monday, 22 Jul 1985 07:05-EDT.
             <[MIT-MC.ARPA].583932.850722.ALAN>


	How should I go about buying a 5 cubed cube?  Can I just
mail 20 or so American dollars to Dr. Bandelow in W. Germany?
Would a personal check be acceptable?  Thanks for any info.

"Just because you're a cube lover doesn't mean you're square"

-Paul Silvey
 pes@mitre-bedford.arpa
 The MITRE Corporation


Received: from Xerox.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 18 Sep 85 18:42:54 EDT
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 18 SEP 85 15:38:16 PDT
Date: 18 Sep 85 15:35:09 PDT (Wednesday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Puzzlers Club resurrected?
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Message-ID: <850918-153816-1795@Xerox>

This came Tuesday (spelling and grammar as you see it).  See my comments
at the end.

	Dear Sirs,
	
	It has come to my attention that apparently quite a lot 
	of the puzzles we sent to Puzzlers Club members were not 
	received by them.  Upon careful investigation of this matter, 
	it now appears that they were confiscated by the Customs who 
	must have thought at the time that they were Taiwan copies.  
	As we did send the goods and paid the Airmail postage and 
	then had so many claims to send the goods a second and third 
	time, the Puzzlers Club suffered a very big loss and 
	consequently had to closed down.
	
	Due to the suppressed Puzzle market, we are not producing new 
	Puzzles at this time.  However, we will be releasing later this 
	year the "I.Q. DIE" which is the Skewb with Die markings, and a 
	Game called 'King/Ace'.  It is the Pyraminx without the 4 apexes,
	decorated in the 4 Card Suits, the Game is similar to Back-Jack.  
	The "I.Q. DIE" and 'King/Ace' including instructions are now 
	available to Ex-Puzzlers Club members and collectors at US$25 
	each including registered Airmail postage.
	
	Also a few 5 x 5 cubes and Regular Skewbs, Timber finished 
	Pyraminx and Immposi-ball are still available as per price list 
	below, including registered Airmail postage.  A copy of the 
	registered receipt will be sent by separate airmail.  Stocks, 
	however are limited, as there will be no additional production 
	for several years at least.
	
	Please let me know if you wish some of the above items.  I do 
	apologize if you were one of the unfortunate ones who were 
	affected by the customs action.
	
	However if you would like to send us your new order with payment, 
	I personally guarantee that you will get the goods this time.  
	(The customs have been notified that we are the legal copyright 
	holder.)
	
	Once again my apologizes for any inconvenience caused.
	
	With warm regards,
	
	Mr Uwe Meffert
	
		
			1985 PRICE-LIST
	Descriptions		Item No.	Unit Price
	
	5 x 5 x 5 cube		CE8426		US$25/Air
	Skewb			CE8431		US$15/Air
	Pyraminx		CE8423-24	US$20/Air
	Timber finished Pyraminx		US$20/Air
	Impossi-Ball		CE8429		US$29/Air
	3D Nought's + Crosses	CE8434		US$ 9/Air
	
	*All plus US$1 for registered mail.
	
	Please rush me with Item No...............Amount:...............
	
	PRICEWELL (FAR EAST) LIMITED
	Excellente Commercial Bldg., (Fifteenth Floor) 
	456 Jaffe Road
	Hong Kong.
	Postal Address: P.O. Box 31008 Causeway Bay, Hong Kong.
	Tel.: 5-8939944
	Cable: "REFOUNDEL"
	Telex: 75600 REF HX

------------------------------------------------------

It was accompanied by one color page (sloppily torn out of a brochure)
containing pictures of the puzzles.

Well, I'm one of those who got burned, though I never was a member of
the Puzzlers Club.  In January 1983, I sent Meffert a Cashier's Check
for a Skewb.  I followed up by letter late that Spring.  In Summer '83,
I paid for and received very promptly a 5x5x5 cube from him.  In January
1984, I wrote a second letter about the missing Skewb.  I never got the
Skewb nor any replies to my letters until this arrived!  So now it's all
the  (U.S.) government's fault.  Hmph.  (Maybe I should attend those
occasional Customs sales I've heard about!)

I'm just a Skewb-hungry sucker, for I'm going to try again.  But I'm not
very reassured by his "personal guarantee".  What good will that do me?
The man doesn't even answer his mail.  Oh, well.  Order at your own
risk.

--Rodney Hoffman  

Date: Wed, 18 Sep 85 21:38:00 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
Subject:  Administrivia
To: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC.ARPA].650223.850918.ALAN>

Several years ago, when Cubes were a big rage, the great volume of mail
sent to this mailing list forced us into making it into a digest.  For most
of the last few years the list has been fairly low-volume, nevertheless I
have refrained from converting the list back to direct-distribution because
some of the messages sent directly to Cube-Lovers were really add-me
requests.  Now I find that I am experiencing a new phenomena:  There is a
growing tendency for people to address replies to messages I forward to
Cube-Lovers to -me-, rather than to the original sender.  This is a bit of
a pain for me, so as of right now, I am converting Cube-Lovers back to
direct-distribution.

Let me take this opportunity to remind you of two bits of administrative
trivia:

1.  Please continue to send all administrative requests (like if you want
    to get off of the list) to Cube-Lovers-Request@MIT-MC.

2.  Old cube-lovers mail is archived in the following places:

    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL0	;oldest mail in forward order
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL1	;next oldest mail in forward order
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL2	;more of same
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL3	;still more of same
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL	;recent mail in reverse order

    Files can be FTP'd from MIT-MC without an account.

Date: Wed, 18 Sep 85 22:18:28 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
Subject:  Puzzlers Club resurrected?  &  Administrivia
To: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC.ARPA].650261.850918.ALAN>

Date: 18 Sep 85 15:35:09 PDT (Wednesday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Puzzlers Club resurrected?
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA

This came Tuesday (spelling and grammar as you see it).  See my comments
at the end.

	Dear Sirs,
	
	It has come to my attention that apparently quite a lot 
	of the puzzles we sent to Puzzlers Club members were not 
	received by them.  Upon careful investigation of this matter, 
	it now appears that they were confiscated by the Customs who 
	must have thought at the time that they were Taiwan copies.  
	As we did send the goods and paid the Airmail postage and 
	then had so many claims to send the goods a second and third 
	time, the Puzzlers Club suffered a very big loss and 
	consequently had to closed down.
	
	Due to the suppressed Puzzle market, we are not producing new 
	Puzzles at this time.  However, we will be releasing later this 
	year the "I.Q. DIE" which is the Skewb with Die markings, and a 
	Game called 'King/Ace'.  It is the Pyraminx without the 4 apexes,
	decorated in the 4 Card Suits, the Game is similar to Back-Jack.  
	The "I.Q. DIE" and 'King/Ace' including instructions are now 
	available to Ex-Puzzlers Club members and collectors at US$25 
	each including registered Airmail postage.
	
	Also a few 5 x 5 cubes and Regular Skewbs, Timber finished 
	Pyraminx and Immposi-ball are still available as per price list 
	below, including registered Airmail postage.  A copy of the 
	registered receipt will be sent by separate airmail.  Stocks, 
	however are limited, as there will be no additional production 
	for several years at least.
	
	Please let me know if you wish some of the above items.  I do 
	apologize if you were one of the unfortunate ones who were 
	affected by the customs action.
	
	However if you would like to send us your new order with payment, 
	I personally guarantee that you will get the goods this time.  
	(The customs have been notified that we are the legal copyright 
	holder.)
	
	Once again my apologizes for any inconvenience caused.
	
	With warm regards,
	
	Mr Uwe Meffert
	
		
			1985 PRICE-LIST
	Descriptions		Item No.	Unit Price
	
	5 x 5 x 5 cube		CE8426		US$25/Air
	Skewb			CE8431		US$15/Air
	Pyraminx		CE8423-24	US$20/Air
	Timber finished Pyraminx		US$20/Air
	Impossi-Ball		CE8429		US$29/Air
	3D Nought's + Crosses	CE8434		US$ 9/Air
	
	*All plus US$1 for registered mail.
	
	Please rush me with Item No...............Amount:...............
	
	PRICEWELL (FAR EAST) LIMITED
	Excellente Commercial Bldg., (Fifteenth Floor) 
	456 Jaffe Road
	Hong Kong.
	Postal Address: P.O. Box 31008 Causeway Bay, Hong Kong.
	Tel.: 5-8939944
	Cable: "REFOUNDEL"
	Telex: 75600 REF HX

------------------------------------------------------

It was accompanied by one color page (sloppily torn out of a brochure)
containing pictures of the puzzles.

Well, I'm one of those who got burned, though I never was a member of
the Puzzlers Club.  In January 1983, I sent Meffert a Cashier's Check
for a Skewb.  I followed up by letter late that Spring.  In Summer '83,
I paid for and received very promptly a 5x5x5 cube from him.  In January
1984, I wrote a second letter about the missing Skewb.  I never got the
Skewb nor any replies to my letters until this arrived!  So now it's all
the  (U.S.) government's fault.  Hmph.  (Maybe I should attend those
occasional Customs sales I've heard about!)

I'm just a Skewb-hungry sucker, for I'm going to try again.  But I'm not
very reassured by his "personal guarantee".  What good will that do me?
The man doesn't even answer his mail.  Oh, well.  Order at your own
risk.

--Rodney Hoffman  

-------

Date: Wed, 18 Sep 85 21:38:00 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
Subject:  Administrivia
To: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC.ARPA

Several years ago, when Cubes were a big rage, the great volume of mail
sent to this mailing list forced us into making it into a digest.  For most
of the last few years the list has been fairly low-volume, nevertheless I
have refrained from converting the list back to direct-distribution because
some of the messages sent directly to Cube-Lovers were really add-me
requests.  Now I find that I am experiencing a new phenomena:  There is a
growing tendency for people to address replies to messages I forward to
Cube-Lovers to -me-, rather than to the original sender.  This is a bit of
a pain for me, so as of right now, I am converting Cube-Lovers back to
direct-distribution.

Let me take this opportunity to remind you of two bits of administrative
trivia:

1.  Please continue to send all administrative requests (like if you want
    to get off of the list) to Cube-Lovers-Request@MIT-MC.

2.  Old cube-lovers mail is archived in the following places:

    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL0	;oldest mail in forward order
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL1	;next oldest mail in forward order
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL2	;more of same
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL3	;still more of same
    MC:ALAN;CUBE MAIL	;recent mail in reverse order

    Files can be FTP'd from MIT-MC without an account.

-------

Date: Wed, 25 Sep 85 10:14:28 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
Subject:  Well, it kept me entertained for an evening.
To: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC.ARPA].658952.850925.ALAN>

Dewdney's column in this month's Scientific American presents a puzzle
which he claims to be comparable in difficulty to a Rubik's cube.  (Like he
claims there are people who can do the cube but haven't done this thing.)
Interested Cube-Hackers might find it diverting to give it a try.  It
didn't take me long to devise a sufficient set of tools for solving it
using only pencil-and-paper.  Personally I think it was significantly
easier than a cube, but perhaps it is harder than the majority of other
permutation puzzles I have gotten my hands on in the last few years.
(But perhaps not.  I did this without having a physical model of it in my
hands, so perhaps that has caused me to overlook something.)

You know, I don't recall ever hearing anybody speculate about just what
makes a permutation puzzle interesting and/or difficult.  I guess the group
has to be large and have a large diameter, and there should be a scarcity
of short identities...

Date: Thu, 10 Oct 85 20:47:33 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@MIT-MC.ARPA>
Subject:  Has anybody heard of this?
To: CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-MC.ARPA
Message-ID: <[MIT-MC.ARPA].675661.851010.ALAN>

    Date: Thu 10 Oct 85 16:21:40-PDT
    From: Haym Hirsh <HIRSH at SUMEX-AIM.ARPA>
    ...
    3.  (forward to cube-lovers if necessary)  I hear there is a textbook
    on group theory using Rubik's Cube for all its examples (or some such
    gimmick).  Have you heard anything about it?
    ...

Not I.  Anyone else?  I'd be interested in seeing this myself.

Received: from Xerox.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 15 Oct 85 01:27:00 EDT
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 14 OCT 85 22:24:05 PDT
Date: 14 Oct 85 22:23:48 PDT (Monday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Skewbs
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Message-ID: <851014-222405-4931@Xerox>

Hey, it worked!  On Sept. 18, I sent an order for a skewb with a
cashier's check for US$16 to Meffert in Hong Kong, in response to his
apology/order form.  I included a cover letter mentioning that I was one
of those who had never received an earlier order (that is, my skewb
order of January 1983).

On Wednesday, Oct. 9, I received the promised airmail letter containing
the registered mail receipt showing the package was mailed Oct. 2, and
on Saturday, Oct. 12, I received a package containing TWO skewbs!  The
thing seems rather easy, I think, but it's great fun because it's so
weird -- so odd looking in mid-turn, so awkward to manipulate quickly,
so difficult to keep your bearings (no face centers that stay put to
navigate by).  I haven't fully explored it, but I've found a few handy
"macros" and identities that seem to get me out of most trouble.

Anyway, if you have wanted a skewb ever since first seeing the drawings
of them in Hofstadter's "Scientific American" column, go ahead and try
Meffert.  In case you've lost my note of Sept 18, here's the relevant
portion again:

			1985 PRICE-LIST
	Descriptions		Item No.	Unit Price
	
	5 x 5 x 5 cube		CE8426		US$25/Air
	Skewb			CE8431		US$15/Air
	Pyraminx		CE8423-24	US$20/Air
	Timber finished Pyraminx		US$20/Air
	Impossi-Ball		CE8429		US$29/Air
	3D Nought's + Crosses	CE8434		US$ 9/Air
	
	*All plus US$1 for registered mail.
	
	Please rush me with Item No...............Amount:...............
	
	PRICEWELL (FAR EAST) LIMITED
	P.O. Box 31008 
	Causeway Bay
	Hong Kong

--Rodney Hoffman

Received: from CSNET-RELAY.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 17 Oct 85 12:49:05 EDT
Received: from ti-csl by csnet-relay.csnet id ab07525; 17 Oct 85 12:46 EDT
Date: 17 Oct 1985 0923-CDT
From: Dan <NICHOLS%CSL60%ti-csl.csnet@CSNET-RELAY.ARPA>
Subject: group theory book
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.arpa
Received: from csl60 by ti-csl; Thu, 17 Oct 85 09:40 CST

10-Oct-85 20:47:33-EDT,00000540;000000000001
Date: Thu, 10 Oct 85 20:47:33 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN%mit-mc.arpa@CSNET-RELAY>
Subject:  Has anybody heard of this?
To: CUBE-LOVERS%mit-mc.arpa@CSNET-RELAY

    Date: Thu 10 Oct 85 16:21:40-PDT
    From: Haym Hirsh <HIRSH at SUMEX-AIM.ARPA>
    ...
    3.  (forward to cube-lovers if necessary)  I hear there is a textbook
    on group theory using Rubik's Cube for all its examples (or some such
    gimmick).  Have you heard anything about it?
    ...

Not I.  Anyone else?  I'd be interested in seeing this myself.



There was a book published a few years ago which had one chapter
dealing with the cube.

Groups and Geometry - Peter Neumann, Gabrielle A. Stoy, & E. C. Thompson
  The Mathematical Institute - Oxford University
  The last chapter is "The Group Theory of the Hungarian Magic Cube".

Dan Nichols
-------


Received: from CSNET-RELAY.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 17 Oct 85 12:49:05 EDT
Received: from ti-csl by csnet-relay.csnet id ab07525; 17 Oct 85 12:46 EDT
Date: 17 Oct 1985 0923-CDT
From: Dan <NICHOLS%CSL60%ti-csl.csnet@CSNET-RELAY.ARPA>
Subject: group theory book
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.arpa
Received: from csl60 by ti-csl; Thu, 17 Oct 85 09:40 CST

10-Oct-85 20:47:33-EDT,00000540;000000000001
Date: Thu, 10 Oct 85 20:47:33 EDT
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN%mit-mc.arpa@CSNET-RELAY>
Subject:  Has anybody heard of this?
To: CUBE-LOVERS%mit-mc.arpa@CSNET-RELAY

    Date: Thu 10 Oct 85 16:21:40-PDT
    From: Haym Hirsh <HIRSH at SUMEX-AIM.ARPA>
    ...
    3.  (forward to cube-lovers if necessary)  I hear there is a textbook
    on group theory using Rubik's Cube for all its examples (or some such
    gimmick).  Have you heard anything about it?
    ...

Not I.  Anyone else?  I'd be interested in seeing this myself.



There was a book published a few years ago which had one chapter
dealing with the cube.

Groups and Geometry - Peter Neumann, Gabrielle A. Stoy, & E. C. Thompson
  The Mathematical Institute - Oxford University
  The last chapter is "The Group Theory of the Hungarian Magic Cube".

Dan Nichols
-------


Received: from Xerox.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 25 Oct 85 12:14:59 EDT
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 25 OCT 85 09:14:40 PDT
Date: 25 Oct 85 09:14:33 PDT (Friday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Rubik's Revenge:  The Group Theoretical Solution
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Message-ID: <851025-091440-1219@Xerox>

I only yesterday came across this from a couple of months ago:  "Rubik's
Revenge:  The Group Theoretical Solution" by M.E. Larsen, in the
'American Mathematics Monthly', Vol. 92, No. 6, 1985, pages 381-390.

Received: from ddn2 by MIT-MC.ARPA  5 Nov 85 11:36:09 EST
Date: 5 Nov 85 11:04 EST
From: mccliman @ DDN2.ARPA
Subject: mailing list
To: cube-lovers @ mit-mc.arpa
CC: mccliman @ DDN2.ARPA

I recently discovered your mailing list involving  the CUBE, and 
would very much like to be added to it.  Thanks.
'mcclimans at ddn2'


Received: from ngp.UTEXAS.EDU by MIT-MC.ARPA 14 Nov 85 18:06:20 EST
Date: Thu, 14 Nov 85 14:27:38 cst
From: jknox@ngp.UTEXAS.EDU (John W. Knox)
Posted-Date: Thu, 14 Nov 85 14:27:38 cst
Message-Id: <8511142027.AA02634@ngp.UTEXAS.EDU>
Received: by ngp.UTEXAS.EDU (4.22/4.22)
	id AA02634; Thu, 14 Nov 85 14:27:38 cst
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.ARPA, mccliman@DDN2.ARPA
Subject: Re:  mailing list
Cc: mccliman@DDN2.ARPAn


q


Received: from CSNET-RELAY.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 15 Nov 85 02:48:31 EST
Received: from ti-csl by csnet-relay.csnet id a006258; 15 Nov 85 2:31 EST
Date: 14 Nov 1985 1008-CST
From: Dan <NICHOLS%CSL60%ti-csl.csnet@CSNET-RELAY.ARPA>
Subject: new article
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.arpa
Received: from csl60 by ti-csl; Thu, 14 Nov 85 10:46 CST

A new article on the cube has appeared. 
"Rubik's Groups" by Edward Turner and Karen Gold in
The American Mathematical Monthly v92n9 November 1985
-------


Received: from Xerox.ARPA by MIT-MC.ARPA 11 Dec 85 14:44:07 EST
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 11 DEC 85 10:35:51 PST
Date: 11 Dec 85 10:35:16 PST (Wednesday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Subject: Gift packs
To: Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.ARPA
Message-ID: <851211-103551-1873@Xerox>

I never really asked to be, but I seem to be a member of Meffert's
Puzzler's Club.  The latest mailing offers several individual items plus
a Christmas special:  9 skewbs plus 9 5x5x5 cubes for US$99 registered
airmail or $US82 registered surface mail.

It says the individual prices are $25 for the 5x5x5 and $15 for the
Skewb, so this is said to be a $360 value.

If you're like me, you're the only cube-lover among those you exchange
gifts with.  But if you happen to have several cube-lovers on your list,
maybe this can solve your shopping worries.

The offer is "limited to December 15, 1985"  All orders should have
"bankdraft or money order in US Dollar Currency".  The address is:
	
	PRICEWELL (FAR EAST) LIMITED
	P.O. Box 31008 
	Causeway Bay
	Hong Kong
	
--Rodney Hoffman

Received: from LLL-MFE.ARPA by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU  6 Jan 86 21:11:01 EST
Date: Mon, 6 Jan 86 18:02 pst
From: "del tufo joseph%e.mfenet"@LLL-MFE.ARPA
Subject: "deltufo%d"@lll-mfe.arpa    
To: cube-lovers@mit-mc.arpa

requesting any information

Received: from Louie.UDEL.EDU by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU 27 Jan 86 12:33:53 EST
Received: from ccvax1 by Louie.UDEL.EDU id a005979; 27 Jan 86 12:32 EST
Received: by vax1.acs.udel.edu (4.12/4.7)
	id AA09563; Mon, 27 Jan 86 11:42:48 est
Date: Mon, 27 Jan 86 11:42:48 est
From: TOMCHANY <jethro%vax1.acs.udel.edu@Louie.UDEL.EDU>
Message-Id: <8601271642.AA09563@vax1.acs.udel.edu>
To: cube-lovers@mc.lcs.mit.EDU

Please add me to your mailing list concerning THE CUBE and other puzzles.
					Thank you,
						M. Tomchany

Received: from Xerox.COM by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU 21 Mar 86 21:07:36 EST
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 21 MAR 86 17:36:22 PST
Date: 21 Mar 86 17:35:55 PST (Friday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.COM
Subject: Eidswick article
To: Cube-Lovers@MC.LCS.MIT.EDU
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.COM
Message-ID: <860321-173622-1700@Xerox>

In case no one's mentioned it yet:

	Eidswick, J. A., "Cubelike Puzzles -- What Are They
	and How Do You Solve Them?", 'American Mathematical
	Monthly', Vol. 93, #3, March 1986, pp. 157-176.

From the introductory section:

	"This article is an attempt to put some algebraic order
	into the business of solving cubelike puzzles.  Ideally,
	an algebraic theory would unfold that would, in an 
	elementary way, yield highly efficient algorithms for all 
	such puzzles.  The work here is a step in that direction."

Included in the applications section are the tetrahedron, octahedron,
dodecahedron, icosahedron, and the general n X n X n cube.

--Rodney Hoffman

Received: from SCRC-STONY-BROOK.ARPA by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU 26 Mar 86 19:25:52 EST
Received: from SORA.SCRC.Symbolics.COM by SCRC-STONY-BROOK.ARPA via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 445199; Mon 24-Mar-86 10:30:16-EST
Date: Mon, 24 Mar 86 10:30 EST
From: Bernard S. Greenberg <BSG@SCRC-STONY-BROOK.ARPA>
Subject: Eidswick article
To: Cube-Lovers@MC.LCS.MIT.EDU
In-Reply-To: <860321-173622-1700@Xerox>
Message-ID: <860324103055.2.BSG@SORA.SCRC.Symbolics.COM>

Now that I saw a letter on this list....

Try to find a store that sells an ordinary
Rubik's cube.  The largest Cambridge game shop
hasn't had them for eternity....


Date: Tue, 15 Apr 86 04:40:29 EST
From: Alan Bawden <ALAN@AI.AI.MIT.EDU>
Subject:  Cube-Lovers moves!
To: CUBE-LOVERS@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
Message-ID: <[AI.AI.MIT.EDU].27214.860415.ALAN>

The Cube-Lovers mailing list has moved from MIT-MC to MIT-AI.  All this
really means is that the archives are in a new place.  Sending mail to
Cube-Lovers@MIT-MC and Cube-Lover-Request@MIT-MC will still work, although
it will be infinitesimaly faster if you mail to Cube-Lovers@MIT-AI and
Cube-Lover-Request@MIT-AI instead.

(Please do not take this move as an opportunity to start spreading false
rumors about the status of MIT-MC.  I am moving Cube-Lovers from MC to AI
because I am -personally- moving to AI, and it is thus convenient for the
mailing list to move with me.  There will be a machine named MIT-MC for
years and years to come.)

For the record:  Old cube-lovers mail is archived on MIT-AI in the
following places:

AI:ALAN;CUBE MAIL0	;oldest mail in forward order
AI:ALAN;CUBE MAIL1	;next oldest mail in forward order
AI:ALAN;CUBE MAIL2	;more of same
AI:ALAN;CUBE MAIL3	;still more of same
AI:ALAN;CUBE MAIL4	;yet more
AI:ALAN;CUBE MAIL	;recent mail in reverse order

Files can be FTP'd from MIT-AI without an account.  Unfortunately the
archives are way too large to be conveniently mailed by either computer or
physical mail.

Received: from MC.LCS.MIT.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU via Chaosnet; 2 AUG 86  16:12:56 EDT
Received: from ICSE.UCI.EDU by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU  2 Aug 86 16:14:39 EDT
Received: from localhost by ICSE.UCI.EDU id a014758; 2 Aug 86 11:05 PDT
To: cube-lovers@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Subject: 5x5x5
Date: Sat, 02 Aug 86 11:05:08 -0800
From: Mark Wadsworth <mw@ICSE.UCI.EDU>

On July 15 I sent a check for $20 to Christoph Bandelow in Germany, and I got 
my cube sometime last week.  He also sent me a letter in which he says,
    I shall be at the International Congress of Mathematicians at
    Berkeley this August 2 - 10 with most of my "cubes". After the
    congress and some travelling time, that is in September, I will
    send you my then updated catalogue - but I hope I can sell the
    complete rest in Berkeley.
If you happen to be around Berkeley this week, it might be worth checking out.
If he sends a catalog with anything in it, I will post info.


Received: from Xerox.COM by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  4 Aug 86 13:44:42 EDT
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 04 AUG 86 10:40:38 PDT
Date: 4 Aug 86 10:40:31 PDT (Monday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.COM
Subject: Rubik Redux
To: Cube-Lovers@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
cc: Hoffman.es@Xerox.COM
Message-ID: <860804-104038-1367@Xerox>

From the New York Times, Sunday, August 3, Business section, p. 6:

	WILL 'SON OF CUBE' BRING ANOTHER BOUT OF RUBIKMANIA?
		     By Martin Gottlieb

... Erno Rubik... is about to mark his return with a puzzle that, if
anything, is more difficult to sove than the once-ubiquitous cube....
Professor Rubik... said his new puzzle, called Rubik's Magic, may have
even more configurations.  But, in his view, who cares? 

"You can solve the puzzle by discovering the possibilities, but it is
magic, I think," Professor Rubik said, absently fondling a prototype of
his new invention in the local offices of Matchbox International Ltd.,
the key arm of a Bermuda-based holding company, that will make and sell
it.

... Within the toy industry ... there is a fair amount of anticipation
about Rubik and his Magic.  "We hope we can create a craze," said David
C.W. Yeh, chairman of Universal Matchbox Group, Matchbox International's
parent company.

Matchbox ... has already taken on 2,000 production workers in China to
make the puzzle, and plans to market hundreds of thousands of copies
around the world this fall, for about $10....

The [Hungarian] Government two years ago approved [Rubik's] plans for a
private business, Rubik Studio, which employs 20 and develops designs
for what Mr. Rubik hopes will be a wide range of items, from buildings
to work flow charts and puzzles.  Rubik's Magic is its first commercial
venture.

... When Professor Rubik traveled to the Nuremburg Toy Fair this year
with his latest puzzle, by all accounts, he caused a commotion.

... Key to [Matchbox's successful proposal to Rubik] were a three- to
five-year game plan and concepts for developing more advanced versions
of Rubik's Magic to be introduced in later years.

Rubik's Magic is marked by the same sort of handsome design as its
predecessor.  Palm-sized, it is made of eight squares of
impact-resistant transparent plastic that in their original position
form two equal rows.  Spread across the squares are depictions of three
unconnected rainbow-colored rings printed on a black background.  The
object of the puzzle is to intertwine the three rings by rejiggering the
squares, which are linked by an ingenious hinge patented by Professor
Rubik, that flexes on the four sides of each square.

Unlike the cube, Mr. Rubik's new puzzle can be nameuvered into a
plethora of different shapes.  [Accompanying picture shows this, but
little more.  Rubik is seen leaning on a table which has four Magic toys
arrayed in different configurations.]  The multi-colored loops break
into fanciful swirls and any number of variations would probably look
pretty good on coffee tables.  "On the way to the solution," Mr. Rubik
said, "you can have wonderful discoveries because you have beautiful
shapes.  The cube was very intellectual.  This item could be more fun
and more pleasure -- it is beautiful and changeable."

... "You sort of expected a lot from him after the cube and I think he
delivered," said Rick Anguilla, editor in chief of Toy & Hobby World,
the leading industry journal, who believes the new puzzle is marked by
the same quality as The Cube.  Mr. Anguilla is one of the few industry
analysts to get a glimpse of the new puzzle and he has a hunch it could
be this year's Teddy Ruxpin.

.... Matchbox has devised a plan for producing and promoting the puzzle
aimed in no small part at heading off the knockoff artists who polluted
the Cube market with counterfeits.  It has applied for patents the world
over, and plans to kick off a simultaneous international sales campaign
in October.  Professor Rubik's signature is on the puzzles, and both
professor and puzzle will be promoted with an exceptionally high sales
budget...

... For Professor Rubik, filming commercials that might well place him
second only to Soviet chief Mikhail S. Gorbachev as the most recognized
Eastern bloc citizen in America, is another adventure.

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 14 Aug 86 15:44:23 EDT
Date: 14 Aug 86 15:34:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: CUBE EXCHANGE
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
I have been a cube person for 5 or 6 years now and I am upset by the almost
total disappearance of the cube and its asociated memorabilia and paraphernalia.
 Therefore, I propose to establish a "CUBE EXCHANGE" to buy, sell and trade cube
items in suport of the greater development of cubing.   To this end it will be
necessary to catalog what was available, what is avaiable and from whom it can
be obtained.  Your assistance in this endeavor will be much appreciated,
including pointers through the archives.  So far I have located a source for
3x3x3 cubes (solid colors, card suits, flowers, numbers, domino dots, fruits,
sports balls, and ball).  Your assistance in who has what for sale would also be
much appreciated.


peter beck
BECK@ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA
------

Received: from PROPHET.BBN.COM by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 14 Aug 86 16:36:18 EDT
Date:     Thu, 14 Aug 86 16:28:18 EDT
From:     Bernie Cosell <cosell@prophet.bbn.com>
To:       cube-lovers@ai.ai.mit.edu
cc:       cube-lovers <cube-lovers@ai.ai.mit.edu>
Subject:  Re:  CUBE EXCHANGE

``The Games People Play'' in Cambridge, MA  (617-492-0711) had, and still
has, lots of cubes.  Carol (who owns the place) continually complains about
the basement-full of 4x4x4 cubes that she's ended up stuck with...

   /bernie

Received: from harvard.HARVARD.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 19 Aug 86 10:45:41 EDT
Received: by harvard.HARVARD.EDU; Tue, 19 Aug 86 10:44:51 EDT
Date: Tue, 19 Aug 86 10:44:51 EDT
Received: by h-sc4.HARVARD.EDU; Tue, 19 Aug 86 10:44:36 edt
From: mazzarel%h-sc4@harvard.HARVARD.EDU
To: cube-lovers@mit-ai.arpa
Subject: Paraphernalia


I bought a book about four years ago in Boston that had procedures for
generating all sorts of patterns on the 3x3 cube.  I think it was about
five to ten 8-1/2 x 11" pieces of paper folded in half and stapled to
form a book.  The cover was blue paper.

Unfortunately, I lost it moving about half a year after that.  By that
time I guess interest in the cube was waning; I have not been able to
find another copy.  If anyone else has a copy or just knows where to
find them, could you please post it to this newsgroup?  I thought it
was quite a find, and think no cube lover should be without one.

                               --Paul (pm@harvard.HARVARD.EDU)

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 25 Aug 86 10:34:12 EDT
Date: 25 Aug 86 10:15:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: singmaster's book
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai.arpa>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  Paraphernalia, 19 aug 86

The book you are talking about is Sinmaster's
"Notes on Rubik's Cube".  It was available as you
describe in the 1981 time frame.  I believe it is 
currently avaialble in hardcover with an expanded
bibliography from "Enslow Publishers" .  They are 
located in northern NJ.  If you can't get their 
address send me a message and I will look it up
for you, if you just want the patterns and not the 
book I can send them to you since I have a copy
of the book.   They also have a second book by Singmaster
that was oriented towards teaching math concepts
with the cube.


pete <beck@ardec-lcss.arpa>
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 25 Aug 86 13:59:23 EDT
Date: 25 Aug 86 13:33:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: CUBE AVAILABILITY
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai.arpa>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
CUBE AVAILABILITY:

1.  REVENGE - on 21 aug 86 I bought a revenge for
$1.99 at the KAY BEE toy store in the Gallery mall,
phila, pa. NOTE: kay bee is a national chain, so check
your area if interested.

2.  GLOBE PUZZLE -  This is a 3x3x3  sphere with the
following difference,  the edge pieces are broken 
into two pieces. Thus the edges and centers are 
interchangeable.  (does this make it a planar puzzle,
for edges and centers)  I haven't received mine yet.  Is 
there any discussion of this variant in the archives.
AVAILABLE from:  the nature company
                             pob 2310
                             berkley, ca 94702
                             800/227-1114
                             globe puzzle, cat # 1449, $12.50
------

Received: from CSNET-RELAY.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 26 Aug 86 00:54:03 EDT
Received: from dartmouth by csnet-relay.csnet id ah03666; 25 Aug 86 22:00 EDT
Received: by dartmouth.EDU (4.13D/2.3D)
	id AA19439; Mon, 25 Aug 86 21:13:13 edt
Date: Mon, 25 Aug 86 21:13:13 edt
To: cube-lovers@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
From: Andy Behrens <andyb%dartmouth.edu@CSNET-RELAY.ARPA>
Subject: Re: Paraphernalia
References: <8608191515.AA23076@EDDIE>
Organization: Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH

The blue-covered book that Paul (pm@harvard.HARVARD.EDU) refers to is
probably David Singmaster's pamphlet Notes_on_Rubik's_'Magic_Cube'.  It
is 60 pages long, and includes sections on the basic mathematical
problem, some of the simple subgroups, pretty patterns, algorithms to
restore the cube in the shortest number of moves.  It lists many
processes for flipping and rotating edges and corners.

If the book is still in print, it is available from

      Enslow Publishers
      Bloy St. and Ramsey Ave.
      Hillside, New Jersey 07205     (USA)
      -- ISBN 0-89490-043-9

      or

      David Singmaster & Co.
      66 Mount View Road
      London N4 4JR     (UK)
      -- ISBN 0-907395-00-7

					Andy Behrens

{astrovax,decvax,ihnp4,linus,harvard}!dartvax!andyb.UUCP
andyb@dartmouth.EDU
andyb%dartmouth@csnet-relay.ARPA


Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 26 Aug 86 08:05:35 EDT
Date: 26 Aug 86 07:55:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: HOFSTADTER
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
HOFSTADTER

I haven't noticed any reference to his 3rd book
which is a reprint of his scientific american
column with postscripts.  I.E. there are 8pgs of
new info; trivia, distribution of patterns from
start, reverse scramblings, measuring
scrambleness.

METAMAGICAL THEMAS
by DOUG HOFSTADTER
BASIC BOOKS
1985 COPYRIGHT
ISBN 0-465-04540-5
PRICE ABOUT $20

PETE     <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA>
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 26 Aug 86 08:05:54 EDT
Date: 26 Aug 86 07:57:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: MEFERT
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
MEFFERT

I have written mefert in march and april 86
 and received no response.  Does anybody out
there know if he is still in business.  By the 
way I ordered and received his XMAS special
of 9 5x5s and 9 skewbs by boat (about 2
months delivery time) with no problems.

PETE     <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA>
------

Received: from STONY-BROOK.SCRC.Symbolics.COM by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 26 Aug 86 08:21:27 EDT
Received: from PEGASUS.SCRC.Symbolics.COM by STONY-BROOK.SCRC.Symbolics.COM via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 87545; Tue 26-Aug-86 08:19:07 EDT
Received: by scrc-pegasus id AA00685; Tue, 26 Aug 86 07:40:08 edt
Date: Tue, 26 Aug 86 07:40:08 edt
From: Bernard S. Greenberg <bsg@scrc-pegasus>
To: cube-lovers%ai.ai.mit.edu@stony
Subject: Paraphernalia

    Date: Mon, 25 Aug 86 21:13:13 edt
    To: cube-lovers@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
    From: Andy Behrens <andyb%dartmouth.edu@CSNET-RELAY.ARPA>
    Subject: Re: Paraphernalia
    References: <8608191515.AA23076@EDDIE>
    Organization: Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH

    The blue-covered book that Paul (pm@harvard.HARVARD.EDU) refers to is
    probably David Singmaster's pamphlet Notes_on_Rubik's_'Magic_Cube'.  It
    is 60 pages long, and includes sections on the basic mathematical
    problem, some of the simple subgroups, pretty patterns, algorithms to
    restore the cube in the shortest number of moves.  
It most certainly made no claim to minimal algorithms.  Minimal
cube algorithms are still an unsolved problem.
						       It lists many
    processes for flipping and rotating edges and corners.

    If the book is still in print, it is available from


(**PLEASE DO NOT REPLY TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS, IT WILL HANG YOUR MAILER.
 I AM SORRY I AM FORCED TO SEND THIS FROM A BROKEN COMPUTER.
 I CAN'T PUT IN A FROM: or REPLY-TO: Either.
 I UNDERSTAND IT's MY PROBLEM, NOT YOUR PROBLEM, PLEASE DON'T FLAME
 AT ME.  Reply to BSG@SCRC-STONY-BROOK not about mailers.  Sorry.)


Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 29 Aug 86 08:02:18 EDT
Date: 29 Aug 86 07:54:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: globe puzzle
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
 GLOBE PUZZLE -  I made a mistake.  The "Globe Puzzle" is NOT a cube.  It looks
like a cube with the edge pieces broken up into its two faces but the corners
are fixed and only the three equators are free to move.  It has a metal surface
painted as a globe and each surface area has a dimple.  These dimples do not
make it any easier to work the puzzle.  It is the same 3" diameter as a cube
ballThe puzzle is made in Hungary.

Thus the globe puzzle is three intersecting rings and appears to be simpler then
the cube.  If the corners could move like the cube would that puzzle also be no
more difficult then the cube?  Any ideas on how to engineer such a puzzle? 

AVAILABLE from:  the nature company
                             pob 2310
                             berkley, ca 94702
                             800/227-1114
                             globe puzzle, cat # 1449, $12.50

peter beck  <beck@ardec-lcss.arpa>
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 10 Sep 86 15:09:04 EDT
Date: 10 Sep 86 13:38:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
1 - I have an incomplete reference to a PUZZLE MUSEUM in the Wash DC area.  
Anybody have any details.
2  -  Is there any good (complete) mailorder catalog for puzzles.
3 -  "INTERLOCKING" CUBE,  this is a puzzle with 27 cubies held together in a
series connection by a rubber band.  The  joint that connects cubies is not
universal.  The cubies all have the same six colors, but not in the same
orientation.  THE OBJECT OF THE PUZZLE IS TO FOLD UP THE CUBIES to make a 3x3x3
cube with solid colored faces.  ANYBODY DONE THIS PUZZLE, ANY REFERENCES.


           /                       \
          |\                      / |
          |   \         /      /   |
          |\   |\     /\    /|  /|
          |   \|   \/    \/  |/  |
           \  |\   |\    /|  /|  /                <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
             \|   \|  \/  |/  |/
               \   |\  |  /|  /
                  \|  \|/  |/
                    \  |  /
                      \|/    
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 19 Sep 86 11:28:14 EDT
Date: 19 Sep 86 10:48:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: interlocking cube
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  msg from Randel Shane requesting clarification of the  "INTERLOCKING" CUBE
PUZZLE, 
 this is a puzzle with 27 cubies held together in a series connection by a
rubber band, like a snake.  
The cubies faces each have a different color, ie, 6 per cubie.  The blue and
green colors are along the connecting axis while the red,white,yellow and orange
colors are parallel to the connecting axis.  The cubbies are not all identical. 

The  joint that connects cubies is not universal.  The joint is made by a slot
in the blue and green faces.  These slots are perpendicular to each other.  This
is limits the possible orientations.
THE OBJECT OF THE PUZZLE IS TO FOLD UP THE CUBIES to make a 3x3x3 cube with six
solid colored faces.  
HAS ANYONE DONE THIS PUZZLE, ANY REFERENCES.

PS Randell, I hope this description is somewhat better.  If you would like to
see it first hand I can send you one for $2.  

PPS I need a better ARPANET address to send you msgs directly.


           /                       \
          |\                      / |
          |   \         /      /   |
          |\   |\     /\    /|  /|
          |   \|   \/    \/  |/  |
           \  |\   |\    /|  /|  /                <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
             \|   \|  \/  |/  |/
               \   |\  |  /|  /
                  \|  \|/  |/
                    \  |  /
                      \|/    
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  6 Oct 86 08:44:03 EDT
Date: 6 Oct 86 08:19:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: rubiks magic
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RUBIK'S MAGIC:

1.  In the NYC area the puzzle is available from Macy's for $10.
2.  Matchbox Toys         "is the distributor"
     141 West Commercial Ave
     Moonachie, NJ 07074
     212/696-5400
3.  HOTLINE:  sat & sun from 9am to 5pm until April 26, 1987.  1800-843-1202, NJ
RES 1800-843-1203
4.  Repairs from matchbox $3
5.  The mechanism is similar to a 2-dimensional Jacobs ladder.
6.  Trivial observations:
   a.  The puzzle has a front and back.
   b.  For three intersecting rings the 8 squares have to be arranged as a 2x3x3
and not as a 2x4.  
7.  It is a good puzzle.

           /                       \
          |\                      / |
          |   \         /      /   |
          |\   |\     /\    /|  /|
          |   \|   \/    \/  |/  |
           \  |\   |\    /|  /|  /                <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
             \|   \|  \/  |/  |/
               \   |\  |  /|  /
                  \|  \|/  |/
                    \  |  /
                      \|/    
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 10 Oct 86 08:40:07 EDT
Date: 10 Oct 86 08:32:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: rubiks magic
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>

RUBIK'S MAGIC:  >>> UPDATE  <<<

ADMINISTRIVIA
1.  In the NYC area the puzzle is available from Macy's for $10.  In your area
it may available from "TOYS R US".
2.  Matchbox Toys         "is the manufacturer"
     141 West Commercial Ave
     Moonachie, NJ 07074
     212/696-5400
3.  HOTLINE:  sat & sun from 9am to 5pm until April 26, 1987.  1800-843-1202, NJ
RES 1800-843-1203
4.  Repairs from matchbox $3

PUZZLE NOTES:
1.  It took about 4 days for my crack puzzle team to solve Rubik's Magic.  
2.  The mechanism (similar to a 2-directional Jacobs ladder) is durable and the
puzzle is fun to manipulate.  There are many 3-dimensional shapes/configurations
that the squares can be arranged as.
3.  It is necessary to establish a notation scheme and establish moves to do the
puzzle systematically.  The puzzle is similar in difficulty to the Skewb or
Pyramid.  I would say about 10 - 15 moves.  
4.   Observations:
   a.  The puzzle has a front and back.
   b.  Each piece always has a hinge with two (2) other pieces.  This causes the
pieces when rotated to rotate as if they were gears, ie, adjacent pieces rotate
in opposite directions.
    c. The 2x4 layout can go either up and down or left and right.
    d.  It is possible to turn the open/loop layout inside out, ie, the
non-intersecting rings can be either on the inside or outside.  This is the same
as changing how the hinge works on the 2x4 layout.  This also exchanges the top
and bottom of the 2x4 layout.
  e.  For three intersecting rings (the object of the puzzle) the 8 squares have
to be arranged as a 2x3x3 and not as a 2x4.  

           /                       \
          |\                      / |
          |   \         /      /   |
          |\   |\     /\    /|  /|
          |   \|   \/    \/  |/  |
           \  |\   |\    /|  /|  /                <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
             \|   \|  \/  |/  |/
               \   |\  |  /|  /
                  \|  \|/  |/
                    \  |  /
                      \|/    
------

Received: from MX.LCS.MIT.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU via Chaosnet; 10 OCT 86  13:42:48 EDT
Date: Fri, 10 Oct 86 13:41:11 EDT
From: Richard Pavelle <RP%MX.LCS.MIT.EDU@MC.LCS.MIT.EDU>
Subject: Rubiks Magic
To: CUBE-LOVERS%MX.LCS.MIT.EDU@MC.LCS.MIT.EDU
Message-ID: <[MX.LCS.MIT.EDU].952133.861010.RP>

It is available at Toys-R-Us in the Boston area.

Received: from DIAMOND.S4CC.Symbolics.COM (TCP 20024231403) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  4 Nov 86 17:11:18 EST
Received: from KOYAANISQATSI.S4CC.Symbolics.COM by DIAMOND.S4CC.Symbolics.COM via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 24817; Tue 4-Nov-86 17:06:25 EST
Date: Tue, 4 Nov 86 17:06 EST
From: David C. Plummer <DCP@QUABBIN.SCRC.Symbolics.COM>
Subject: rubiks magic
To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>,
    cube-lovers <cube-lovers@MIT-AI.ARPA>
In-Reply-To: The message of 10 Oct 86 09:32 EDT from "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Message-ID: <861104170610.5.DCP@KOYAANISQATSI.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>

Rubik's Magic is available at "Games people play" near Harvard Square
for a little under $15.  As with Beck, it took me about 4 days to solve
it.  My resulting solution is strickingly simple (3 macros), but I took
a lot of interesting paths to get there.  I think it could have been
made harder be repainting the back surface, but doing so may take it out
of the reach of the general public.  (It would require solving it to an
intermediate configuration that doesn't look anywhere near solved, and
then frob it again.)

It's a good puzzle for playing with and relieving the fidgets.
Mathematically it isn't very interesting, nor are there any "pretty
patterns" other than solved1 and solved2.


Received: from SUMEX-AIM.ARPA (TCP 1200000070) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  4 Nov 86 17:48:42 EST
Date: Tue 4 Nov 86 14:43:05-PST
From: Haym Hirsh <HIRSH@SUMEX-AIM.ARPA>
Subject: SF Bay area availability of Rubik things
To: cube-lovers@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
cc: hirsh@SUMEX-AIM.ARPA
In-Reply-To: <861104170610.5.DCP@KOYAANISQATSI.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>
Message-ID: <12252334415.75.HIRSH@SUMEX-AIM.ARPA>

Rubik's magic was available at the local Sears (Palo Alto/Mtn View) for
around $8, but they are out of stock now.  It is currently available
at Norney's in the same mall for around $13.

A few 5x5x5 Rubik's cubes were available at Games and Things in the
Stanford shopping center about a week ago for around $20.
-------

Received: from WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM (TCP 20024231532) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  4 Nov 86 18:25:14 EST
Received: from ROCKY-MOUNTAINS.S4CC.Symbolics.COM by WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 71267; Tue 4-Nov-86 18:23:59 EST
Date: Tue, 4 Nov 86 18:22 EST
From: Allan C. Wechsler <acw@WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>
Subject: rubiks magic
To: DCP@QUABBIN.SCRC.Symbolics.COM, beck@clstr1.decnet,
    cube-lovers@MIT-AI.ARPA
In-Reply-To: <861104170610.5.DCP@KOYAANISQATSI.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>
Message-ID: <861104182207.9.ACW@ROCKY-MOUNTAINS.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>

    Date: Tue, 4 Nov 86 17:06 EST
    From: David C. Plummer <DCP@QUABBIN.SCRC.Symbolics.COM>

    Rubik's Magic is available at "Games people play" near Harvard Square
    for a little under $15.  

As usual, Carol Monica is charging unreasonable prices.  Boycott this
moderately obnoxious woman and buy your Magic from Zayre or Bradlee's at
about $7-8.

    It's a good puzzle for playing with and relieving the fidgets.
    Mathematically it isn't very interesting, nor are there any "pretty
    patterns" other than solved1 and solved2.

The "pretty patterns" are more sculptural than geometrical.  Can you
make a cube?

Mathematically, there are a couple of interesting points.  There are
sixteen achievable 2x4 configurations, linked by a nice little rosette
of generators.

Unsolved stumper:  The pattern

	XXX
	X X
	XXX

appears unreachable, but we haven't been able to prove it.  Can someone
come up with a proof?  (Or -- hope against hope -- has anyone achieved
it?)

I find the mechanical aspect more pleasing than the cube.  "Magic" is more
satisfying to manipulate than almost any of its predecessors.  The
linking principle can be generalized to any number of squares.  I am
considering breaking a couple and wiring them together to make Big
Magic.


Received: from PROPHET.BBN.COM (TCP 20026200117) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  4 Nov 86 19:23:09 EST
Date:     Tue, 4 Nov 86 19:12:58 EST
From:     Bernie Cosell <cosell@prophet.bbn.com>
To:       cube-lovers@ai.ai.mit.edu
cc:        beeler@prophet.bbn.com, alatto@prophet.bbn.com, jr@prophet.bbn.com, 
           lcosell@prophet.bbn.com
Subject:  Re:  rubiks magic

On the other side, GPP is generally the *only* comprehensive games-hackers
store about and we would do well to go out of our way to patronize it.
I hardly care about the $5.00 one way or the other on something like
Magic, but where else can you get Monkey puzzles, and the Pentagle series
(are they still in business?  I haven't seen any new ones recently),
go/shogi sets/books, imported jigsaw puzzles and on and on.  If she doesn't
get a decent profit on the things she expects to sell a fair number of,
then she won't be able to stock the esoteric and fun stuff.

  /Bernie

Bernie Cosell                       Internet:  cosell@bbn.com
Bolt, Beranek & Newman, Inc         USENET:    bbnccv!bpc
Cambridge, MA   02238               Telco:     (617) 497-3503

Received: from MC.LCS.MIT.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU via Chaosnet; 6 NOV 86  15:06:54 EST
Received: from nrl-aic (TCP 3200200010) by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU  6 Nov 86 15:02:30 EST
Date: 6 Nov 1986 13:41:48 EST (Thu)
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@nrl-aic.ARPA>
Subject: Magic
To: Cube-lovers@mit-mc.ARPA
Message-Id: <531686509/hoey@nrl-aic>

I have three macros for transforming 2x4 rectangles.  To solve the
puzzle, I use two of them followed by a seven-flip macro that changes a
2x4 shape into a 3x3-1 shape (beats me how BECK can call this a
``2x3x3'').  Took me a couple of half-days to solve it.

I have found 32 different 2x4 rectangles.  I think that is all of them,
but I haven't got any proofs, nor even a decent mathematical model for
deciding when a flip is possible.

I am trying to understand how the strings work.  First, it looks like
there is twice as much string as necessary; each string is doubled.  I
guess that this duplication has no effect on the puzzle except for
durability, but until I can dyke one out can't be sure.  I'm concerned
that the string may be one double loop, so I'm looking for a good way
to make sure the thing doesn't unstring entirely when I cut one.

Each side of each piece has four short channel segments and four long;
half are occupied with string.  If you continue each segment across
each hinge to the next piece, you get eight channels composed of
alternating long and short segments.  Again, four of the eight channels
are occupied.  In the positions I've seen, each of the channels
contains eight pairs of segments.

But Magic is more complicated than that--the strings do not always
follow a channel from piece to piece.  On half of the pieces, there is
an extra loop of string that wraps back onto the piece without
following the channel to the next piece.  I don't know what function
this serves.

If a good model of the string interactions can be developed, we may be
able to make an attack on the doughnut problem based on the length of
string channels.  In the doughnut, there are four ten-pair channels and
four six-pair channels.  We may be able to show that the string wouldn't
reach one, and would exceed the other.  More likely, the model will
prohibit the doughnut more directly.

There is another string-related question I am wondering about.  I have
noticed some of the string-pairs getting twisted.  I wonder how bad
this can get.  Does anyone have an operation that can be repeated to
make the twists tighter and tighter?  Are these puzzles built for
obsolescence?

I have been considering Magic metrics, but it's a difficult problem.
Counting flips is easy enough, but how do you count a move that skews a
parallelogram?  Are such skew moves necessary?

Dan

Received: from MC.LCS.MIT.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU via Chaosnet; 6 NOV 86  18:17:21 EST
Received: from WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM (TCP 20024231532) by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU  6 Nov 86 18:15:02 EST
Received: from ROCKY-MOUNTAINS.S4CC.Symbolics.COM by WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 71915; Thu 6-Nov-86 18:11:09 EST
Date: Thu, 6 Nov 86 18:13 EST
From: Allan C. Wechsler <acw@WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>
Subject: Magic
To: hoey@NRL-AIC.ARPA, Cube-lovers@MIT-MC.ARPA
In-Reply-To: <531686509/hoey@nrl-aic>
Message-ID: <861106181326.6.ACW@ROCKY-MOUNTAINS.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>

    Date: 6 Nov 1986 13:41:48 EST (Thu)
    From: Dan Hoey <hoey@nrl-aic.ARPA>

    I have found 32 different 2x4 rectangles.  I think that is all of them,
    but I haven't got any proofs, nor even a decent mathematical model for
    deciding when a flip is possible.

I think I have a proof.  Wait a few paragraphs.

    If a good model of the string interactions can be developed, we may be
    able to make an attack on the doughnut problem based on the length of
    string channels.  In the doughnut, there are four ten-pair channels and
    four six-pair channels.  We may be able to show that the string wouldn't
    reach one, and would exceed the other.  More likely, the model will
    prohibit the doughnut more directly.

Here is my model.  It might be wrong.

The puzzle is a cycle of eight squares.  Their underlying adjacency
relationships never change.

Each pair of squares is bound together by two loops of string (nylon
fishing wire, actually).  Those two loops are dedicated to holding those
two squares together -- they never migrate to other squares, although
parts of a loop may sometimes lie on one of the pair, sometimes on the
other.

I need a diagram of the channels:

         ---- ----
        |/\/\|/\/\|
        |\/\/|\/\/|
	|/\/\|/\/\|
        |\/\/|\/\/|
         ---- ----

I offer the usual apologies about aspect ratio.  Now, ignore the two
sided nature of the puzzle.  Imagine that the two squares form a 1x2
unit billiard table, and think of the channels as trajectories of
billiard balls, and you will see that the channels form two disjoint
"orbits", each (* 4 (sqrt 2)) units long.  The two loops of string
follow these two orbits, crossing from the obverse to the reverse sides
of the puzzle and back again at every chance they get.  If you work it
out, you see that half the channels are empty at any given time.

The details are too mindbending, but the result is clear: those two
squares are bound together.  They don't depend on synergy from the rest
of the puzzle to bind them.

Now close the pair of squares, putting the right on top of the left as
if you were finishing reading a book.  You can open the pair again
vertically, but only in one direction.  The front square can flip up, or
it can flip down, but not both.  Without loss of generality, let's say
it can flip up.  If you had folded the right square behind the left
instead of in front, it would be able to flip down.

Now gedankenfollow these gendankendirections.  

Put the squares back as above.  Only the square on the right (the rotor)
will move. Keep the left square (the stator) fixed.

Fold the rotor in front of the stator.  Flip the rotor up, and over, and
behind the stator.  Now it will open to the left.  Flip the rotor around
the left edge of the stator until it is in front again.  Then it will
flip down.  Do so, until it is in back again.  Now it will open to the
right.

You have moved the rotor all the way around the stator.  At some point,
each edge of both served as the hinge.  This amazing orbit is the basis
for the bewilderingness of the puzzle.  The path is a bizarre
three-dimensional cloverleaf.

I think that I have now given all the "laws of motion" of the puzzle.

Since the laws are all local, governing the motion of one adjacent pair
of squares, there is no obvious invariant that forbids the doughnut.

    There is another string-related question I am wondering about.  I have
    noticed some of the string-pairs getting twisted.  I wonder how bad
    this can get.  Does anyone have an operation that can be repeated to
    make the twists tighter and tighter?  Are these puzzles built for
    obsolescence?

I am convinced not.

    I have been considering Magic metrics, but it's a difficult problem.
    Counting flips is easy enough, but how do you count a move that skews a
    parallelogram?  Are such skew moves necessary?

    Dan

Your 32 configurations are characterized as follows:  Turn the puzzle so
the unlinked rings are in front.  Rotate it so Rubik's signature is in
the bottom row.  The signature square could be in any of four positions.
The "matchbox" square could be clockwise from Rubik, or
counterclockwise.  And Rubik himself could be in any of four
orientations.  This determines the orientations of all the other
squares.  There are no more degrees of freedom.

It is more instructive to consider the "supergroup", which includes
180-deg rotations but excludes turning the puzzle over.  This group has
sixty-four elements in thirty-two similar pairs.  I have a table.


Received: from nrl-aic (TCP 3200200010) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 13 Nov 86 15:00:34 EST
Date: 13 Nov 1986 13:16:44 EST (Thu)
From: Dan Hoey <hoey@nrl-aic.ARPA>
Subject: Magic
To: acw%WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM@scrc-stony-brook.ARPA, jr@bbncc5.ARPA,
        alatto@bbncc5.ARPA, cube-lovers@mit-AI.ARPA
In-Reply-To: <861106181326.6.ACW@ROCKY-MOUNTAINS.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>
Message-Id: <532289805/hoey@nrl-aic>

    Date: Thu, 6 Nov 86 18:13 EST
    From: Allan C. Wechsler <acw@WAIKATO.S4CC.Symbolics.COM>

    ... Here is my model.  It might be wrong.

From what I have seen of the puzzle, your model seems to correctly
specify necessary conditions for puzzle movement.  I have some
additional constraints, below.

    Each pair of squares is bound together by two loops of string (nylon
    fishing wire, actually).

This is acceptable for a model, though the physical puzzles I have seen
are have twice as much wire on half of the squares as on the others.  I
don't know why, and I am nearly ready to take one apart just to verify
my several curiosities about the construction.

    ... Only the square on the right (the rotor) will move. Keep the left
    square (the stator) fixed.  Flip the rotor ....
    You have moved the rotor all the way around the stator.  At some point,
    each edge of both served as the hinge.  This amazing orbit is the basis
    for the bewilderingness of the puzzle.  The path is a bizarre
    three-dimensional cloverleaf.

This corresponds with my understanding of two-square interaction.
Thanks for nailing it down.

    I think that I have now given all the "laws of motion" of the puzzle.

There is something more, because each square has *two* neighbors.
Consider a stator with two rotors.  There are two ``bizarre three-
dimensional cloverleaves'' about the stator, but both rotors move in
the same b3dc.  Furthermore, they cannot pass each other in their
common b3dc.  Thus if one goes around more than a complete revolution,
the other must make a net advance in the same direction.

    Since the laws are all local, governing the motion of one adjacent
    pair of squares, there is no obvious invariant that forbids the
    doughnut.

I think I can demonstrate one, given the fact that the pieces are
joined in a cycle.  Let us tie each pair of adjacent squares together
as in your model.  We notice that in the starting position, each of the
occupied channels is occupied by two wires, one for each neighbor of
the square.  Suppose we dyke out a loop from the left neighbor, and
splice the left neighbor's connections into the right neighbor's loop.
Then do this all the other duplicate loops.  I believe we end up with a
puzzle held together by four pieces of wire, each (* 8 (sqrt 2)) units
long.  One of them is drawn below, assuming transparent squares.  I
believe that this puzzle will move in the same way as the original one.

         ---- ---- ---- ---- 
        |/\  |    |/\  |    |
        |\ \ |   /|  \ |    |
        | \ \|  / |   \|    |
        |  \ |\/  |    |\   |
         ---- ---- ---- ---- 
        |   \|    |  /\| \  |
        |    |\   | /  |\ \ |
        |    | \  |/   | \ \|
        |    |  \/|    |  \/|
         ---- ---- ---- ---- 

Now put away the dykes and try to fold the puzzle into a doughnut.  If
you succeed, you will have formed two (* 10 (sqrt 2)) wires and two
(* 6 (sqrt 2)) wires:

         ---- ---- ----          ---- ---- ----
        |/\  |    |/\  |        |    |/\  |    |
        |\ \ |   /|  \ |        |   /|  \ |    |
        | \ \|  / |   \|        |  / |   \|    |
        |  \ |\/  |   /|        | /  |    |\   |
         ---- ---- ----          ---- ---- ----
        |   \|    |  / |        |/   |    | \  |
        |   /|    | /  |        |\   |    |  \ |
        |  / |    |/   |        | \  |    |   \|
        | /  |    |\   |        |  \ |    |   /|
         ---- ---- ----          ---- ---- ----
        |/   |  /\| \  |        |   \|    |  / |
        |\   | /  |\ \ |        |    |\   | /  |
        | \  |/   | \ \|        |    | \  |/   |
        |  \/|    |  \/|        |    |  \/|    |
         ---- ---- ----          ---- ---- ----

Changing the string lengths is a little more magic than I expect from
Rubik.

My thanks to John Robinson for encouraging me to believe that the
string-length criterion has merit.  He tells me Andy Latto has a
similar proof.

Dan

Received: from MC.LCS.MIT.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU via Chaosnet; 30 NOV 86  15:36:27 EST
Received: from cc2.bbn.com (TCP 1000200022) by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU 30 Nov 86 15:36:55 EST
Date: Sun, 30 Nov 86 15:34:25 EST
From: Buz Owen <ado@cc2.bbn.com>
Subject: 5 cube?
To: cube-lovers@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Cc: ado@cc2.bbn.com

Can someone on this list supply me with the address of a store
that can sell me a 5x5x5 cube?  I am not on the list so please
reply directly.  Thanks/Buz



Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  3 Dec 86 10:27:14 EST
Date: 3 Dec 86 08:55:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 5X5X5 AVAILABILITY
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  Buz Owen's request for a source for 5x5x5 cubes

1.  Jerry Slocum
     257 South Palm Drive
     Beverly Hills, CA 90212
     213/273-2270
has both 5x5x5s and skewbs available for $20 each.

2. Jerry Slocum has also authored a book "Puzzles Old and New, How to make and
Solve Them" which he sells for $22 outside of CA, autographed if requested.  
The table of contents is:
chap 1  PUT-TOGETHER PUZZLES - Putting the object together is the puzzle.
chap 2  TAKE-APART PUZZLES - Opening or taking the object apart is the puzzle.
chap 3  INTERLOCKING SOLID PUZZLES - Disassembly and assembly is required to
solve the puzzle.
chap 4  DISENTANGLEMENT PUZZLES - The puzzle is to disentangle and re-entangle
the parts of the puzzle.
chap 5  SEQUENTIAL MOVEMENT PUZZLES -  The puzzle is to move parts of the object
to a goal (The cube, et al)
chap 6  PUZZLE VESSELS - Drinking or pouring liquid, or filling the vessels
without spilling is the puzzle.
chap 7  DEXTERITY PUZZLES -  Manual dexterity is required to solve the puzzle.
chap 8  VANISH PUZZLES - The puzzle is to explain a vanishing or changing image.
chap 9  IMPOSSIBLE OBJECT PUZZLES - The puzzle is to discover how the object is
made.
chap 10  FOLDING PUZZLES - The puzzle is to achieve a specified gola by folding.

3.  Richard Hess
     4100 Palos Verdes Dr. East
     Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90274
has available for sale many of the puzzles from Jerry Slocum's book.

4.  Another book of interest is:
        536 Puzzles & Curious Problems by  Henry Ernest Dudeney,
        1967 by Charles Scribner's Sons
        Library of Congress Catalog Card NUmber 67-15488.

5.  There are sources for other variations of the cube, if anybody is interested
I will compile a list.

CUBING IS FOREVER ---     <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
------

Received: from REAGAN.AI.MIT.EDU by AI.AI.MIT.EDU via Chaosnet; 3 DEC 86  17:04:45 EST
Received: from PIGPEN.AI.MIT.EDU by REAGAN.AI.MIT.EDU via CHAOS with CHAOS-MAIL id 14155; Wed 3-Dec-86 17:04:49 EST
Date: Wed, 3 Dec 86 17:04 EST
From: Alan Bawden <Alan@AI.AI.MIT.EDU>
Subject: BITNET Redistribution of Cube-Lovers
To: Cube-Lovers@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
Message-ID: <861203170452.2.ALAN@PIGPEN.AI.MIT.EDU>

I'm looking for someone on BITNET to volunteer to maintain a BITNET
redistribution list for the Cube-Lovers mailing list.  This is necessary
because the machine that's acting as the Internet/BITNET gateway,
WISCVM.WISC.EDU, is swamped with mailing list mail.  List administrators
(like me) are being asked to set up redistribution lists to help lighten
the load.  If we can set one up for Cube-Lovers then WISCVM will only have
to relay each message to one host instead of the current 20 or so.

If you're willing and able to take this on, please let me know.

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  5 Dec 86 09:20:22 EST
Date: 5 Dec 86 09:06:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
From:	CLSTR1::SYSTEM        4-DEC-1986 11:27
To:	CLSTR1::BECK
Subj:	Undeliverable mail

 ----Transcript of session follows----
"mit" is an unrecognized hostname/address

 ----Unsent message follows----
Date: 4 Dec 86 11:18:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: CUBE AVAILABILITY
To: "cube-lovera" <cube-lovera@mit>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
1.  MY MSG TO BUZ OWEN was not delivered (RE: 5x5x5 availability).  If anybody out there knows him or how to forward the msg to him (he is not on the cube lovers list) please do so.

2.  It will take a bout a week but I will compile a list where and what is available in the world of cubes.  It will be a compilation of Helm's 
, Bandelow's, Hess's and Beck's supplies.  Please be patient.  If you are looking for a specific cube let me know I can get you that answer faster.

<beck@ardec-lcss>
------
------

Received: from Xerox.COM (TCP 1200400040) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  7 Dec 86 19:21:54 EST
Received: from CheninBlanc.ms by ArpaGateway.ms ; 07 DEC 86 16:21:13 PST
Date: 7 Dec 86 16:21:12 PST (Sunday)
From: Hoffman.es@Xerox.COM
Subject: Puzzle show
To: Cube-Lovers@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
Reply-To: Hoffman.es@Xerox.COM
Message-ID: <861207-162113-1746@Xerox>

PUZZLES OLD AND NEW:  Head Crackers, Patience Provers, and Other Tactile
Teasers

[including more variations on Rubik's cube than I've ever seen before]

EXHIBITION TOUR:
  	
	Craft and Folk Art Museum, LA	Nov. 26, '86 - Feb. 22, 1987
	MIT Museum			April 6 - June 15, 1987
	Hudson River Museum		July 22 - Sept. 27, 1987
	Science Museum of Minnesota	Oct. 19, '87 - Jan 3, 1988
	Ontario Science Center		Jan. 25 - March 6, 1988

Accompanied by the book PUZZLES OLD AND NEW: HOW TO MAKE AND SOLVE THEM
by Jerry Slocum and Jack Botermans ($20).

The exhibit discusses
	The Art in Puzzles
	The Social Experience
	Cultural Values
	Puzzles in the Industrial Age
	Puzzles in Education
	Puzzles and Science

It aims "to explore the history, meanings, and design of mechanical
puzzles."  The extensive displays categorize puzzles according to their
object:
	Put-Together Puzzles
	Take-Apart Puzzles
	Interlocking Solid Puzzles
	Disentanglement Puzzles
	Sequential Movement Puzzles
	Puzzle Vessels
	Dexterity Puzzles
	Vanish Puzzles
	Impossible Object Puzzles
	Folding Puzzles

Puzzles have been lent by collectors and museums around the world.  The
exhibit consultants are Benjamin Kilborne and Martin Gardner.

There are hands-on puzzles, but too simple and too few.  It's a
wonderful and tantalizing display of puzzles.  I was SOOO frustrated not
to be able to handle all the beautiful, enticing pieces.  Of course, if
I had been permitted to, I would never leave.... 

  --  Rodney Hoffman

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  9 Dec 86 14:05:07 EST
Date: 9 Dec 86 13:53:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
From:	CLSTR1::SYSTEM        9-DEC-1986 09:22
To:	CLSTR1::BECK
Subj:	Undeliverable mail

 ----Transcript of session follows----
"mit.ai" is an unrecognized hostname/address

 ----Unsent message follows----
Date: 9 Dec 86 09:18:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit.ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
From:	CLSTR1::SYSTEM        8-DEC-1986 15:52
To:	CLSTR1::BECK
Subj:	Undeliverable mail

 ----Transcript of session follows----
"ai.ai.mit.edu" is an unrecognized hostname/address

 ----Unsent message follows----
Date: 8 Dec 86 15:32:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: slocum's book
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@ai.ai.mit.edu>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  Slocum's book.
I have not read it yet but I have ordered a copy and hope to be able to answer
your questions soon.  In issue #6 of "World Game Review" (avaialble for $8 for 4
issues from Michael Keller, 3367-I North Chatam Road, Ellicott City, MD 21043)
Slocum's book is reviewed.  It says that this book is a collaboration with Jack
Botermans author of "creative puzzles of the world" which was the best puzzle
book but is now out of print.  The new book has much of the older books material
on mechanical puzzles plus new material.  The book was liked in general.

<beck@ardec-lcss>
------
------
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  9 Dec 86 14:27:43 EST
Date: 9 Dec 86 13:56:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
From:	CLSTR1::SYSTEM        8-DEC-1986 15:52
To:	CLSTR1::BECK
Subj:	Undeliverable mail

 ----Transcript of session follows----
"mit.ai" is an unrecognized hostname/address

 ----Unsent message follows----
Date: 8 Dec 86 15:35:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: buz owens
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit.ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>

1.  MY direct MSG TO BUZ OWEN was not delivered (RE: 5x5x5 availability).  If
anybody out there knows him or how to forward the msg to him (he is not on the
cube lovers list) please do so.
 
2.  It will take a bout a week but I will compile a list where and what is
available in the world of cubes.  It will be the highlights from Helm's
, Bandelow's, Hess's and Beck's supplies.  If you want a complete classification
guide request it separately and I will mail you a copy of Bandelow's collection
or if you are more patient wait for Cecil Smith to complete his book.  Please be
patient.  If you are looking for a specific cube let me know I can get you that
answer faster.
 
<beck@ardec-lcss>
------
------
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 10 Dec 86 08:41:01 EST
Date: 10 Dec 86 08:28:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
cc: beck
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  Slocum's book.
I have not read it yet but I have ordered a copy and hope to be able to answer
your questions soon.  In issue #6 of "World Game Review" (avaialble for $8 for 4
issues from Michael Keller, 3367-I North Chatam Road, Ellicott City, MD 21043)
Slocum's book is reviewed.  It says that this book is a collaboration with Jack
Botermans author of "creative puzzles of the world" which was the best puzzle
book but is now out of print.  The new book has much of the older books material
on mechanical puzzles plus new material.  The book was liked in general.
 
<beck@ardec-lcss>
------
------
------

Received: from MC.LCS.MIT.EDU (CHAOS 3131) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 10 Dec 86 17:15:52 EST
Received: from navajo.stanford.edu (TCP 4402000060) by MC.LCS.MIT.EDU 10 Dec 86 17:00:36 EST
Received: by navajo.stanford.edu; Wed, 10 Dec 86 12:56:25 PST
Received: from jack-jr.edsel.uucp by edsel.uucp (2.2/SMI-2.0)
	id AA27267; Wed, 10 Dec 86 12:51:04 pst
Received: by jack-jr.edsel.uucp (1.1/SMI-3.0DEV3)
	id AA12942; Wed, 10 Dec 86 12:52:32 PST
Date: Wed, 10 Dec 86 12:52:32 PST
From: edsel!jack-jr!jeb@navajo.stanford.edu (Jim Boyce)
Message-Id: <8612102052.AA12942@jack-jr.edsel.uucp>
To: navajo!cube-lovers%mit-mc.ARPA@navajo.stanford.edu
Subject: Magic: Construction

A friend on mine applied too much force in an odd direction and
produced a tangled mess.  I was nominated to fix it.  My approach 
was to take it apart completely and then put it back together.

Tools required: 
Well, I used a paper clip.

Components:
A Magic is made out of 16 loops of string (actually nylon fishline)
and 8 panels.  The loops of string are all the same length.  The
loops of string are not tangled in any way.  The panels each
decompose into two clear plastic covers and a piece of paper
(actually plastic).  The panels are held together by the string.

Construction:

Each loop of string is twisted around three panels.  It follows a
path like these:

 ---- ---- ----           ---- ---- ----
|/\  |  /\|/\  |         |  /\|/\  |  /\|
|\ \ | / /|\ \ |   or    | / /|\ \ | / /|
| \ \|/ / | \ \|         |/ / | \ \|/ / |
|  \/|\/  |  \/|         |\/  |  \/|\/  |
 ---- ---- ----           ---- ---- ----

For each string, there is another string that lies in the same
channels.  When stringing a loop through the channels, there is a
choice at the points where the string passes from one panel the
next: Which string is closer to the center of the panel?  That
question is answered differently for the two strings running throught
the same channels.

[I believe that this is done so that the net force trying to twist
the toy at that point is near zero.  The redundancy also probably
strengthens the toy.]

The panels can be divided into two sets of four: The panels that are
centers in these triples and the panels that are ends.  Each "end panel"
is an end for two different triples.

Strings don't lie in crossing channels on the same side of a panel.  
(That describes how the two pairs of loops go on the same triple and 
how two triples interact on their common end panel.)

-jim boyce


Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 11 Dec 86 09:03:53 EST
Date: 11 Dec 86 08:58:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
From:	CLSTR1::MAILER        3-DEC-1986 10:50
To:	BECK
Subj:	[TCP/IP Mail From: <@AI.AI.MIT.EDU,@ardec-lcss.arpa:beck@clstr1.decnet>] 5X5X5 AVAILABILITY

Return-Path: <@AI.AI.MIT.EDU,@ardec-lcss.arpa:beck@clstr1.decnet>
Received: from AI.AI.MIT.EDU by ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA ;  3 Dec 86 10:49:48 EST
Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  3 Dec 86 10:27:14 EST
Date: 3 Dec 86 08:55:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 5X5X5 AVAILABILITY
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  Buz Owen's request for a source for 5x5x5 cubes

1.  Jerry Slocum
     257 South Palm Drive
     Beverly Hills, CA 90212
     213/273-2270
has both 5x5x5s and skewbs available for $20 each.

2. Jerry Slocum has also authored a book "Puzzles Old and New, How to make and
Solve Them" which he sells for $22 outside of CA, autographed if requested.  
The table of contents is:
chap 1  PUT-TOGETHER PUZZLES - Putting the object together is the puzzle.
chap 2  TAKE-APART PUZZLES - Opening or taking the object apart is the puzzle.
chap 3  INTERLOCKING SOLID PUZZLES - Disassembly and assembly is required to
solve the puzzle.
chap 4  DISENTANGLEMENT PUZZLES - The puzzle is to disentangle and re-entangle
the parts of the puzzle.
chap 5  SEQUENTIAL MOVEMENT PUZZLES -  The puzzle is to move parts of the object
to a goal (The cube, et al)
chap 6  PUZZLE VESSELS - Drinking or pouring liquid, or filling the vessels
without spilling is the puzzle.
chap 7  DEXTERITY PUZZLES -  Manual dexterity is required to solve the puzzle.
chap 8  VANISH PUZZLES - The puzzle is to explain a vanishing or changing image.
chap 9  IMPOSSIBLE OBJECT PUZZLES - The puzzle is to discover how the object is
made.
chap 10  FOLDING PUZZLES - The puzzle is to achieve a specified gola by folding.

3.  Richard Hess
     4100 Palos Verdes Dr. East
     Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90274
has available for sale many of the puzzles from Jerry Slocum's book.

4.  Another book of interest is:
        536 Puzzles & Curious Problems by  Henry Ernest Dudeney,
        1967 by Charles Scribner's Sons
        Library of Congress Catalog Card NUmber 67-15488.

5.  There are sources for other variations of the cube, if anybody is interested
I will compile a list.

CUBING IS FOREVER ---     <BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
------

------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 11 Dec 86 09:27:35 EST
Date: 11 Dec 86 08:53:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: SOME CUBES
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
------
HIGHLIGHTS OF CUBE TYPES WITH AVAILABILITY ( Bandelow's complete compilation is
9 pages. Supposedly both Slocum and Cecil Smith have more extensive lists.)

I will follow Bandelow/Helm classification guide, ie, 
  A.  3x3x3 cubes of standard size (57mm edge)
  B.  size variations of 3x3x3 cube
  C.  shape variations of the 3x3x3 cube
  D.  NxN (N not 3) cubes and their relatives
  E.  other magic polyhedra
  F.  some other logical puzzles
  G.  various cube rel;ated products

SOURCES:  PB - Peter Beck, 54 Richwood place, Denville, NJ 07834, add $1
shipping per order
                CB  - Christoph Bandelow, Haarholzer Strasse 13, D-4630 Bochum
1, W Germany
                GH  - Georges Helm, 22A rue Bommert, 4716 Petange, Luxembourg
                RH  - Richard Hess, 4100 Palos Verdes Dr. East, Rancho Palos
Verdes, CA 90274

  A.  3x3x3 cubes of standard size (57mm edge)
ORIGINAL HUNGARIAN RUBIK'S CUBE (CB $8)
DELUXE CUBE, bonded plastic instead of stickers, Ideal (PB $3)
SIAMESE CUBES, 2 standard cubes joined by having one edge in common, Ideal (CB
$15)
THERE ARE MANY STICKER VARIATIONS; some are one to one subsitions of cubie
stickers,  some are pictures that cover a whole cube face, some are puzzles
(like the calendar cubes), some divide the coloring of cubies so that the 3x3x3
simulates other cubes (see Hofstadter's articles).  I have not seen any
references to Penrose Tiling cubie designs.
NUMBERS, FRUITS, CARDS, FLOWERS, SPORTS BALLS,DIE 1, FEMALE NUDES wonderful,
taiwan (PB $2)

  B.  size variations of 3x3x3 cube
50mm, 38mm, 33mm, 31mm, 30mm, 25mm, 20mm - made into keychains and necklaces.

  C.  shape variations of the 3x3x3 cube
because the cubies always maintain the same in-out orientation relative to the
center of the cube, cubies can have any surface extension desired.  Therefore
there are cubes are spherical cubes, cubes with corner pieces trimmed to
equilateral triangles, some edge pieces are trimmed so that they make a single
plane presentation (eg, makes a barrel), I HAVE NOT HEARD OF ANY THAT MAKE A
SOLID SCULPTURE OF THE CUBE, eg, a bust of RUBIK.
OCTAGONAL PRISM - four parallel edges are trimmed giving an octagonal prism, (CB
$8)
MEDIUM MAGIC GLOBE - Sold as Rubik's World, (CB or GH $10)
MEDIUM MAGIC BALL - sp-herical cube, (PB $2)

  D.  NxN (N not 3) cubes and their relatives
56mm 2x2x2 RUBIK'S POCKET CUBE, (CB $8)
OCTAHEDRON 2X2X2 each rotation axis runs through two opposite corners of the
octahedron, (CB $8)
TETRAHEDRAL 2X2X2, each rotation axis runs through the centers of two opposite
edges, (CB $8)
STAR PUZZLE 2X2X2, similar to tetrahedron with a unicolored tetrahedron attached
to the center of the big tetrahedron.
TRICKHAUS 2X2X2, four edges are trimmed leaving a prism, can be arranged to look
like a house, ie, square base and and roof, (CB $8)
4x4x4, RUBIK'S REVENGE, if you are lucky $2 at KAYBEE TOY STORES
5x5x5, ($20 from jerry slocum, see previous msg)

  E.  other magic polyhedra
SKEWB
PYRAMINX
MEGAMINX
ALEXANDER'S STAR
IMPOSSI-BALL
ORB
HUGARIAN GLOBE, FROM NATURE CO., NIT A CUBE
MISSINK LINK

  F.  some other logical puzzles
  G.  various cube related products

<BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 11 Dec 86 15:15:58 EST
Date: 11 Dec 86 15:06:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: slocums book
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
RE:  Slocum's book.
I have not read it yet but I have ordered a copy and hope to be able to answer
your questions soon.  In issue #6 of "World Game Review" (avaialble for $8 for 4
issues from Michael Keller, 3367-I North Chatam Road, Ellicott City, MD 21043)
Slocum's book is reviewed.  It says that this book is a collaboration with Jack
Botermans author of "creative puzzles of the world" which was the best puzzle
book but is now out of print.  The new book has much of the older books material
on mechanical puzzles plus new material.  The book was liked in general.
 
<beck@ardec-lcss>
------
------

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU 24 Dec 86 11:41:58 EST
Date: 24 Dec 86 11:38:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: magic review article
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
I have written a review of MAGIC for the  "World Game Review", edited and
published by Michael Keller, 3367-I north Chatam Road, Ellicott City, MD 21043,
$8 for 4 issues.   It as you can tell is based on the CUBE-LOVERS list dialog. 
If anybody would like to comment or make recomMend any additions or deletions
please forward your suggestions to me  ,<BECK@ARDEC-LCSS>.

A REVIEW OF RUBIK'S MAGIC
BY Peter Beck,  Dec 24, 1986

The Hungarian Government two years ago approved Rubik's plans for a private
business, Rubik Studio, to develop designs for what Mr. Rubik hopes will be a
wide range of items including puzzles.  Rubik's Magic is its first commercial
venture.  It is being manufactured and marketed by Matchbox and is generally
available at prices ranging from $9-$15, $7 on sale.  Matchbox's deal with 
Rubik was based on a three-to-five year plan that includes the development and
marketing of more advanced versions of Magic.

Like the cube, MAGIC is good for playing with and relieving the fidgets.  It is
palm-sized and made up of eight 2"x1/4" squares ,of impact-resistant transparent
plastic, folding up into a 1"x2"x4" block which easily fits into a shirt or
jacket pocket.  Unlike the cube it can be maneuvered into a plethora of
different geometrical shapes which makes it more fun and pleasureful to
manipulate than the cube.    Any of the various geometrical variations look 
good on the coffee table and your guests can make magical discoveries as they
play with it.

The object of the puzzle is to manipulate the squares from their original
pattern (henceforth known as pattern #1) to pattern #2.  In pattern #1 the
squares form two equal rows (i.e., 2x4 arrangement) and spread across one side
is a depiction of three unconnected rainbow-colored rings printed on a black
background.  By folding, flipping, flopping and flapping the squares, which are
linked by an ingenious hinge, we arrive at pattern #2 which is three
intersecting rings on the reverse side.

Even though Magic has many interesting 3-dimensional geometric shapes, e.g.,
cube, A-frame house, 1x2 box with lid, both named patterns occur when the puzzle
is in its planar or flat state.  To go from pattern #1 to #2 there are two
operators necessary in the 2x4 arrangement to position the squares for the
operator that transforms the puzzle into the 3x3 minus a corner arrangement that
displays the three intersecting rings pattern.  When the puzzle is in the 2x4
arrangement with pattern #1 correct, the squares can be rearranged by either
folding it on the long axis to make a loop which can be rotated or by flipping
the 2 ends towards the center and then by un-flipping the puzzle on the opposite
side in a perpendicular direction to the flipping.  In order to display the
solved puzzle it is now necessary to flip and flap and flop the puzzle (6 moves)
into the 3x3 minus a corner arrangement.  It should be noted that it is possible
to be in a 2x4 arrangement where you cannot get to pattern #1 with only the two
2x4 operators of above.  You will either need to use the operator that changes
the puzzle to the 3x3 or develop another operator.

For those of you who would like to take it apart and then put it back together
here are some hints.  Tools required:  a paper clip.  Each loop of string is
twisted around three squares in a path like this:
 
               ---- ---- ----            ---- ----  ----
              |/ \  |  / \ | / \  |           |  / \ |/  \  |  / \ |
              |\  \ | /   /|\   \ |   or     | /   /|\   \ | /   /|
              | \  \|/   / | \   \|           |/   / | \   \|/   / |
              |  \ /|\  /  |  \  /|           |\  /  |  \  /|\  /  |
               ---- ---- ----            ---- ----  ----
 
16 loops of string (actually nylon fishline) are used to make the hinges that
hold the squares together.  The loops of string are all the same length.and are
not tangled in any way.  For each string, there is another string that lies in
the same channels.  When stringing a loop through the channels, there is a
choice at the points where the string passes from one square to the next: Which
string is closer to the center of the square?  That question is answered
differently for the two strings running throught the same channels.  Strings
don't lie in crossing channels on the same side of a square. (That describes how
the two pairs of loops go on the same triple and how two triples interact on
their common end square.)

Now that you have decomposed the puzzle into its component parts why don't you
customize it before reassembly.  (The squares each decompose into two clear
plastic covers and a piece of paper with the design printed on it which are held
together by the strings and not glue.).   So what about some original designs,
maybe even Penrose tiling?  How about adding additional squares?  

For the more mathematically inclined it has been noted that the sameness of the
string length is what restricts the arrangements of the squares.  Can you prove
that the Donut, 3x3 with center missing, is impossible?  Can you invent a
nomenclature and metric for counting moves?   

The future exists, first in the imagination, then in the will and fianlly in
reality.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:  The above was written with the passive participation of with
CUBE-LOVERS computer bulletin board at MIT;  	MILNET ADDRESS
<CUBE-LOVERS@MIT-AI>.  Thanks to all who participated in the MAGIC dialog to
date.

------

Date: Mon, 29 Dec 86 00:31:25 EST
From: Marty Connor <MDC@AI.AI.MIT.EDU>
To: CUBE-LOVERS@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
cc: BOTTLENECK@AI.AI.MIT.EDU
Message-ID: <134690.861229.MDC@AI.AI.MIT.EDU>

There is a new puzzle named the "Bottleneck" from a company called
Groton Ltd. in Fitchburg, MA. It looks impossible to solve but they
claim it can be done. It consists of an ordinary glass bottle and a 
solid plastic rod which fits closely within the bottle. There is a 
marble in the bottle but the rod is held in the bottle by a screw 
and nut as shown below:

          |   |
          |   |
          |   |
         ||   ||
         ||   ||
         ||   ||
        / |   | \
       /  |   |  \
      /   |   |   \
     |    |   |    |
     |    |   |    |
     |    |   |    |
     | |==|===|=|| |    ----  Threaded screw and nut go thru threaded rod
     |    |   |    |
     |    |   |    |
     |             |
     |   __        |
     |  (  )       |    ----  Marble
     ---------------

The object is to remove the marble. It is fairly easy to remove the nut
but it is very difficult to turn the screw. It apparantly can be done
without inserting a tool between the bottleneck and the rod. 

It costs about $10.00 and is available from Games People Play in Cambridge 
and Miscellanea in Acton. Has anyone tried it?

Received: from ARDEC-LCSS.ARPA.ARPA (TCP 30003004013) by AI.AI.MIT.EDU  6 Jan 87 14:57:48 EST
Date: 6 Jan 87 14:43:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: 
To: "cube-lovers" <cube-lovers@mit-ai>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
From:	CLSTR1::SYSTEM        5-JAN-1987 16:10
To:	CLSTR1::BECK
Subj:	Undeliverable mail

 ----Transcript of session follows----
"ai.ai.mit.edu" is an unrecognized hostname/address

 ----Unsent message follows----
Date: 5 Jan 87 16:02:00 EST
From: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
Subject: bottleneck
To: "mdc" <mdc@ai.ai.mit.edu>
Reply-To: "CLSTR1::BECK" <beck@clstr1.decnet>
The puzzle is trivial.  It takes about 5 minutes to disassemble and 10 to assemble.  No sopecial tools are needed.

<beck@ardec-lcss>
------
------

